Apollo 13
Odyssey's damaged service module, as seen fromthe Apollo Lunar Module Aquarius, hours beforereentry
Mission type Crewed lunar landing attempt (H)
Operator NASA
COSPAR ID CSM: 1970-029A
LM: 1970-029C
SATCAT no. 4371[1]
Missionduration 5 days, 22 hours, 54 minutes,41 seconds[2]
Spacecraft properties
Spacecraft Apollo CSM-109
Apollo LM-7
Manufacturer CSM: North American Rockwell
LM: Grumman
Launch mass 44,069 kg (CSM: 28,881 kg;[3] LM:15,188 kg)[4]
Landing mass 5,050 kilograms (11,133 lb)[5]
Crew
Crew size 3
Members James A. Lovell Jr.
John L. Swigert Jr.
Fred W. Haise Jr.
Callsign CSM: Odyssey
LM: Aquarius
Start of mission
Apollo 13
Apollo 13 (April 11–17, 1970) was the seventh crewed mission in the Apollo space programand would have been the third Moon landing. The craft was launched from Kennedy SpaceCenter on April 11, 1970, but the landing was aborted after an oxygen tank in the servicemodule (SM) exploded two days into the mission, disabling its electrical and life-supportsystem. The crew, supported by backup systems on the Apollo Lunar Module, instead loopedaround the Moon in a circumlunar trajectory and returned safely to Earth on April 17. Themission was commanded by Jim Lovell, with Jack Swigert as command module (CM) pilotand Fred Haise as Lunar Module (LM) pilot. Swigert was a late replacement for KenMattingly, who was grounded after exposure to rubella.
A routine stir of an oxygen tank ignited damaged wire insulation inside it, causing anexplosion that vented the contents of both of the SM's oxygen tanks to space.[note 1] Withoutoxygen, needed for breathing and for generating electrical power, the SM's propulsion andlife support systems could not operate. The CM's systems had to be shut down to conserve itsremaining resources for reentry, forcing the crew to transfer to the LM as a lifeboat. With thelunar landing canceled, mission controllers worked to bring the crew home alive.
Although the LM was designed to support two men on the lunar surface for two days,Mission Control in Houston improvised new procedures so it could support three men forfour days. The crew experienced great hardship, caused by limited power, a chilly and wetcabin and a shortage of drinking water. There was a critical need to adapt the CM'scartridges for the carbon dioxide scrubber system to work in the LM; the crew and missioncontrollers were successful in improvising a solution. The astronauts' peril briefly renewedpublic interest in the Apollo program; tens of millions watched the splashdown in the SouthPacific Ocean on television.
An investigative review board found fault with preflight testing of the oxygen tank and Teflonbeing placed inside it. The board recommended changes, including minimizing the use ofpotentially combustible items inside the tank; this was done for Apollo 14. The story ofApollo 13 has been dramatized several times, most notably in the 1995 film Apollo 13 (basedon Lost Moon, the 1994 memoir co-authored by Lovell) and an episode of the 1998miniseries From the Earth to the Moon.
On May 25, 1961, U.S. President John F. Kennedy challenged his nation to land an astronauton the Moon by the end of the decade, with a safe return to Earth.[11] NASA worked towardsthis goal incrementally, sending astronauts into space during Project Mercury and ProjectGemini, leading up to the Apollo program.[12] The goal was achieved with Apollo 11, whichlanded on the Moon on July 20, 1969. Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walked on the lunarsurface while Michael Collins orbited the Moon in Command Module Columbia. The missionreturned to Earth on July 24, 1969, fulfilling Kennedy's challenge.[11]
NASA had contracted for fifteen Saturn V rockets to achieve the goal; at the time no oneknew how many missions this would require.[13] Since success was obtained in 1969 with thesixth Saturn V on Apollo 11, nine rockets remained available for a hoped-for total of tenlandings. After the excitement of Apollo 11, the general public grew apathetic towards thespace program and Congress continued to cut NASA's budget; Apollo 20 was canceled.[14]
Despite the successful lunar landing, the missions were considered so risky that astronautscould not afford life insurance to provide for their families if they died in space.[note 2][15]
Even before the first U.S. astronaut entered space in 1961, planning for a centralized facilityto communicate with the spacecraft and monitor its performance had begun, for the mostpart the brainchild of Christopher C. Kraft Jr., who became NASA's first flight director.During John Glenn's Mercury Friendship 7 flight in February 1962 (the first crewed orbitalflight by the U.S.), one of Kraft's decisions was overruled by NASA managers. He wasvindicated by post-mission analysis and implemented a rule that, during the mission, the
Background
Launch date April 11, 1970, 19:13:00 UTC[6]
Rocket Saturn V SA-508
Launch site Kennedy LC-39A
End of mission
Recovered by USS Iwo Jima
Landing date April 17, 1970, 18:07:41 UTC
Landing site South Pacific Ocean21°38′24″S 165°21′42″W
Flyby of Moon (orbit and landing aborted)
Closestapproach April 15, 1970, 00:21:00 UTC
Distance 254.0 kilometers (157.8 mi)
Docking with LM
Docking date April 11, 1970, 22:32:08 UTC
Undocking date April 17, 1970, 16:43:00 UTC
Left to right: Jim Lovell, Jack Swigert, Fred Haise
Apollo program
Swigert, Lovell and Haise the day beforelaunch.
flight director's word was absolute[16] – to overrule him, NASA would have to fire him on thespot.[17] Flight directors during Apollo had a one-sentence job description, "The flightdirector may take any actions necessary for crew safety and mission success."[18]
Houston's Mission Control Center was opened in 1965. It was in part designed by Kraft andnow named for him.[16] In Mission Control, each flight controller, in addition to monitoringtelemetry from the spacecraft, was in communication via voice loop to specialists in a StaffSupport Room (or "back room"), who focused on specific spacecraft systems.[17]
Apollo 13 was to be the second H mission, meant to demonstrate precision lunar landingsand explore specific sites on the Moon.[19] With Kennedy's goal accomplished by Apollo 11,and Apollo 12 demonstrating that the astronauts could perform a precision landing, missionplanners were able to focus on more than just landing safely and having astronautsminimally trained in geology gather lunar samples to take home to Earth. There was agreater role for science on Apollo 13, especially for geology, something emphasized by themission's motto, Ex luna, scientia (From the Moon, knowledge).[20]
Position Astronaut
Commander (CDR) James A. Lovell Jr.Fourth and last spaceflight
Command Module Pilot(CMP) John "Jack" L. Swigert Jr.Only spaceflight
Lunar Module Pilot(LMP) Fred W. Haise Jr.Only spaceflight
Apollo 13's mission commander, Jim Lovell, was 42 years old at the time of the spaceflight.He was a graduate of the United States Naval Academy and had been a naval aviator and testpilot before being selected for the second group of astronauts in 1962; he flew with FrankBorman in Gemini 7 in 1965 and Buzz Aldrin in Gemini 12 the following year before flying inApollo 8 in 1968, the first spacecraft to orbit the Moon.[21] At the time of Apollo 13, Lovellwas the NASA astronaut with the most time in space, with 572 hours over the threemissions.[22]
Jack Swigert, the command module pilot (CMP), was 38 years old and held a B.S. inmechanical engineering and an M.S. in aerospace science; he had served in the Air Force andin state Air National Guards and was an engineering test pilot before being selected for thefifth group of astronauts in 1966.[23] Fred Haise, the Lunar Module pilot (LMP), was 36years old. He held a B.S. in aeronautical engineering, had been a Marine Corps fighter pilot,and was a civilian research pilot for NASA when he was selected as a Group 5astronaut.[24][25]
According to the standard Apollo crew rotation, the prime crew for Apollo 13 would have been thebackup crew[note 3] for Apollo 10, with Mercury and Gemini veteran Gordon Cooper in command, DonnF. Eisele as CMP and Edgar Mitchell as LMP. Deke Slayton, NASA's Director of Flight Crew Operations,never intended to rotate Cooper and Eisele to a prime crew assignment, as both were out of favor –Cooper for his lax attitude towards training, and Eisele for incidents aboard Apollo 7 and an extramaritalaffair. He assigned them to the backup crew because no other veteran astronauts were available.[28]
Slayton's original choices for Apollo 13 were Alan Shepard as commander, Stuart Roosa as CMP, andMitchell as LMP. However, management felt Shepard needed more training time, as he had only recentlyresumed active status after surgery for an inner ear disorder and had not flown since 1961. Thus, Lovell'screw (himself, Haise and Ken Mattingly), having all backed up Apollo 11 and being slated for Apollo 14,was swapped with Shepard's.[28]
Swigert was originally CMP of Apollo 13's backup crew, with John Young as commander and Charles Duke as lunar module pilot.[29] Seven daysbefore launch, Duke contracted rubella from his son's friend.[30] This exposed both the prime and backup crews, who trained together. Of thefive, only Mattingly was not immune through prior exposure. Normally, if any member of the prime crew had to be grounded, the remainingcrew would be replaced as well, and the backup crew substituted, but Duke's illness ruled this out,[31] so two days before launch, Mattingly wasreplaced by Swigert.[23] Mattingly never developed rubella and later flew on Apollo 16.[32]
For Apollo, a third crew of astronauts, known as the support crew, was designated in addition to the prime and backup crews used on projectsMercury and Gemini. Slayton created the support crews because James McDivitt, who would command Apollo 9, believed that, with preparationgoing on in facilities across the US, meetings that needed a member of the flight crew would be missed. Support crew members were to assist as
Astronauts and key Mission Control personnel
Mission Operations Control Room duringthe TV broadcast just before theApollo 13 accident. Astronaut Fred Haiseis shown on the screen.
Apollo 13 flown silver Robbins medallion
CSM-109 Odyssey in theOperations and CheckoutBuilding
directed by the mission commander.[33] Usually low in seniority, they assembled the mission's rules,flight plan, and checklists, and kept them updated;[34][35] for Apollo 13, they were Vance D. Brand, JackLousma and either William Pogue or Joseph Kerwin.[note 4][40]
For Apollo 13, flight directors were Gene Kranz, White team[41] (the lead flight director);[42][43] GlynnLunney, Black team; Milton Windler, Maroon team and Gerry Griffin, Gold team.[41] The CAPCOMs (theperson in Mission Control, during the Apollo program an astronaut, who was responsible for voicecommunications with the crew)[44] for Apollo 13 were Kerwin, Brand, Lousma, Young and Mattingly.[45]
The Apollo 13 mission insignia depicts the Greek god of the Sun, Apollo, with three horses pulling hischariot across the face of the Moon, and the Earth seen in the distance. This is meant to symbolize theApollo flights bringing the light of knowledge to all people. The mission motto, Ex luna, scientia ("Fromthe Moon, knowledge"), appears. In choosing it, Lovell adapted the motto of his alma mater, the NavalAcademy, Ex scientia, tridens ("From knowledge, sea power").[46][47]
On the patch, the mission number appeared in Roman numerals as Apollo XIII. It did not have to bemodified after Swigert replaced Mattingly, as it is one of only two Apollo mission insignia – the otherbeing Apollo 11 – not to include the names of the crew. It was designed by artist Lumen Martin Winter,who based it on a mural he had painted for the St. Regis Hotel in New York City.[48] The mural was laterpurchased by actor Tom Hanks,[49] who portrayed Lovell in the movie Apollo 13, and it is now in theCaptain James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center in Illinois.[50]
The mission's motto was in Lovell's mind when he chose the call sign Aquarius for the lunar module, taken from Aquarius, the bringer ofwater.[51][52] Some in the media erroneously reported that the call sign was taken from a song by that name from the musical Hair.[52][53] Thecommand module's call sign, Odyssey, was chosen not only for its Homeric association but to refer to the recent film, 2001: A Space Odyssey,based on a short story by science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke.[51] In his book, Lovell indicated he chose the name Odyssey because he likedthe word and its definition: a long voyage with many changes of fortune.[52]
Due to the accident and the last minute crew change of Jack Swigert replacing Ken Mattingly three days prior to launch, the Apollo 13 Robbinsmedallions flown aboard the mission were melted down and reminted after the mission to reflect the correct crew, and the absence of a lunarlanding date.[54]
The Saturn V rocket used to carry Apollo 13 to the Moon was numbered SA-508, and was almost identical to thoseused on Apollo 8 through 12.[55] Including the spacecraft, the rocket weighed in at 2,949,136 kilograms(6,501,733 lb).[56] The S-IC first stage's engines were rated to generate 440,000 newtons (100,000 lbf) less totalthrust than Apollo 12's, though they remained within specifications.[57] To keep its liquid hydrogen propellent cold,the S-II second stage's cryogenic tanks were insulated; on earlier Apollo missions this came in the form of panelsthat were affixed, but beginning with Apollo 13, insulation was sprayed onto the exterior of the tanks.[58] Extrapropellant was carried as a test, since future J missions to the Moon would require more propellant for their heavierpayloads. This made the vehicle the heaviest yet flown by NASA, and Apollo 13 was visibly slower to clear the launchtower than earlier missions.[57]
The Apollo 13 spacecraft consisted of Command Module 109 and Service Module 109 (together CSM-109), calledOdyssey, and Lunar Module 7 (LM-7), called Aquarius. Also considered part of the spacecraft was the launch escapesystem, which would propel the command module (CM) to safety in the event of a problem during liftoff, and theSpacecraft–LM Adapter, numbered as SLA-16, which housed the lunar module (LM) during the first hours of themission.[59][60]
The LM stages, CM and service module (SM) were received at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in June 1969; the portions of the Saturn V werereceived in June and July. Thereafter, testing and assembly proceeded, culminating with the rollout of the launch vehicle, with the spacecraftatop it, on December 15, 1969.[59] Apollo 13 was originally scheduled for launch on March 12, 1970, but that January NASA announced themission would be postponed until April 11, both to allow more time for planning and to spread the Apollo missions over a longer period.[61] Theplan was to have two Apollo flights per year and was in response to budgetary constraints[62] that had recently seen the cancellation of Apollo20.[63]
Mission insignia and call signs
Space vehicle
Lovell practices deploying theflag
Lovell (left) and Haise duringgeology training in Hawaii,January 1970
The Apollo 13 prime crew undertook over 1,000 hours of mission-specific training, more than five hours for everyhour of the mission's ten-day planned duration. Each member of the prime crew spent over 400 hours insimulators of the CM and (for Lovell and Haise) of the LM at KSC and at Houston, some of which involved theflight controllers at Mission Control.[64] Flight controllers participated in many simulations of problems with thespacecraft in flight, which taught them how to react in an emergency.[17] Specialized simulators at other locationswere also used by the crew members.[64]
The astronauts of Apollo 11 had minimal time for geology training, with only six months between crewassignment and launch; higher priorities took much of their time.[65] Apollo 12 saw more such training, includingpractice in the field, using a CAPCOM and a simulated backroom of scientists, to whom the astronauts had todescribe what they saw.[66] Scientist-astronaut Harrison Schmitt saw that there was limited enthusiasm forgeology field trips. Believing an inspirational teacher was needed, Schmitt arranged for Lovell and Haise to meethis old professor, Caltech's Lee Silver. The two astronauts, and backups Young and Duke, went on a field trip withSilver at their own time and expense. At the end of their week together, Lovell made Silver their geology mentor,who would be extensively involved in the geology planning for Apollo 13.[67] Farouk El-Baz oversaw the trainingof Mattingly and his backup, Swigert, which involved describing and photographing simulated lunar landmarks from airplanes.[68] El-Baz hadall three prime crew astronauts describe geologic features they saw during their flights between Houston and KSC; Mattingly's enthusiasmcaused other astronauts, such as Apollo 14's CMP, Roosa, to seek out El-Baz as a teacher.[69]
Concerned about how close Apollo 11's LM, Eagle, had come to running out of propellant during its lunar descent, mission planners decided thatbeginning with Apollo 13, the CSM would bring the LM to the low orbit from which the landing attempt would commence. This was a changefrom Apollo 11 and 12, on which the LM made the burn to bring it to the lower orbit. The change was part of an effort to increase the amount ofhover time available to the astronauts as the missions headed into rougher terrain.[70]
The plan was to devote the first of the two four-hour lunar surface extravehicular activities (EVAs) to setting up the Apollo Lunar SurfaceExperiments Package (ALSEP) group of scientific instruments; during the second, Lovell and Haise would investigate Cone crater, near theplanned landing site.[71] The two astronauts wore their spacesuits for some 20 walk-throughs of EVA procedures, including sample gatheringand use of tools and other equipment. They flew in the "Vomit Comet" in simulated microgravity or lunar gravity, including practice in donningand doffing spacesuits. To prepare for the descent to the Moon's surface, Lovell flew the Lunar Landing Training Vehicle (LLTV) after receivinghelicopter training.[72] Despite the crashes of one LLTV and one similar Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV) prior to Apollo 13, missioncommanders considered flying them invaluable experience and so prevailed on reluctant NASA management to retain them.[73]
Apollo 13's designated landing site was near Fra Mauro crater; the Fra Mauro formation was believed to containmuch material spattered by the impact that had filled the Imbrium basin early in the Moon's history. Dating itwould provide information not only about the Moon, but about the Earth's early history. Such material was likelyto be available at Cone crater, a site where an impact was believed to have drilled deep into the lunar regolith.[74]
Apollo 11 had left a seismometer on the Moon, but the solar-powered unit did not survive its first two-week-longlunar night. The Apollo 12 astronauts also left one as part of its ALSEP, which was nuclear-powered.[75] Apollo 13also carried a seismometer (known as the Passive Seismic Experiment, or PSE), similar to Apollo 12's, as part ofits ALSEP, to be left on the Moon by the astronauts.[76] That seismometer was to be calibrated by the impact,after jettison, of the ascent stage of Apollo 13's LM, an object of known mass and velocity impacting at a knownlocation.[77]
Other ALSEP experiments on Apollo 13 included a Heat Flow Experiment (HFE), which would involve drillingtwo holes 3.0 meters (10 ft) deep.[78] This was Haise's responsibility; he was also to drill a third hole of that depthfor a core sample.[79] A Charged Particle Lunar Environment Experiment (CPLEE) measured the protons andelectrons of solar origin reaching the Moon.[80] The package also included a Lunar Atmosphere Detector(LAD)[81] and a Dust Detector, to measure the accumulation of debris.[82] The Heat Flow Experiment and theCPLEE were flown for the first time on Apollo 13; the other experiments had been flown before.[79]
To power the ALSEP, the SNAP-27 radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG) was flown. Developed by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission,SNAP-27 was first flown on Apollo 12. The fuel capsule contained about 3.79 kilograms (8.36 lb) of plutonium oxide. The cask placed around thecapsule for transport to the Moon was built with heat shields of graphite and of beryllium, and with structural parts of titanium and of Inconelmaterials. Thus, it was built to withstand the heat of reentry into the Earth's atmosphere rather than pollute the air with plutonium in the eventof an aborted mission.[83]
Training and preparation
Experiments and scientific objectives
Haise practices removing the fuelcapsule from its transport cask mountedon the LM. The real cask sank unopenedinto the Pacific Ocean with its radioactivecontents.
A United States flag was also taken, to be erected on the Moon's surface.[84] For Apollo 11 and 12, the flaghad been placed in a heat-resistant tube on the front landing leg; it was moved for Apollo 13 to theModularized Equipment Stowage Assembly (MESA) in the LM descent stage. The structure to fly the flagon the airless Moon was improved from Apollo 12's.[85]
For the first time, red stripes were placed on the helmet, arms and legs of the commander's A7Lspacesuit. This was done as, after Apollo 11, those reviewing the images taken had trouble distinguishingArmstrong from Aldrin, but the change was approved too late for Apollo 12.[86] New drink bags attachedinside the helmets, and that were to be sipped from as the astronauts walked on the Moon, weredemonstrated by Haise during Apollo 13's final television broadcast before the accident.[87][88]
Apollo 13's primary mission objectives were to: "Perform selenological inspection, survey, and samplingof materials in a preselected region of the Fra Mauro Formation. Deploy and activate an Apollo LunarSurface Experiments Package. Develop man's capability to work in the lunar environment. Obtainphotographs of candidate exploration sites."[89] The astronauts were also to accomplish otherphotographic objectives, including of the Gegenschein from lunar orbit, and of the Moon itself on thejourney back to Earth. Some of this photography was to be performed by Swigert as Lovell and Haise walked on the Moon.[90] Swigert was alsoto take photographs of the Lagrangian points of the Earth-Moon system. Apollo 13 had twelve cameras on board, including those for televisionand moving pictures.[79] The crew was also to downlink bistatic radar observations of the Moon. None of these was attempted because of theaccident.[90]
The circumlunar trajectory followed by Apollo 13, drawn to scale. The accident occurred about 56 hours into the mission.
The mission was launched at the planned time, 2:13:00 pm EST (19:13:00 UTC) on April 11. An anomaly occurred when the second-stage, center(inboard) engine shut down about two minutes early.[91][92] This was caused by severe pogo oscillations. Starting with Apollo 10, the vehicle'sguidance system was designed to shut the engine down in response to chamber pressure excursions.[93] Pogo oscillations had occurred on Titanrockets (used during the Gemini program) and on previous Apollo missions,[94][95] but on Apollo 13 they were amplified by an interaction withturbopump cavitation.[96][97] A fix to prevent pogo was ready for the mission, but schedule pressure did not permit the hardware's integrationinto the Apollo 13 vehicle.[93][98] A post-flight investigation revealed the engine could only withstand one additional cycle before it would suffercatastrophic failure.[93] The four outboard engines and the S-IVB third stage burned longer to compensate, and the vehicle achieved very close tothe planned circular 190 kilometers (120 mi; 100 nmi) parking orbit, followed by a translunar injection (TLI) about two hours later, setting themission on course for the Moon.[91][92]
Flight of Apollo 13
Launch and translunar injection
Apollo 13 launches fromKennedy Space Center, April 11,1970
Apollo 13 spacecraft configuration duringmost of the journey: Click on image forkey to numbered components.
Apollo 13: Houston, We've Got aProblem (1970)—Documentary about themission by NASA (28:21)
Houston, we've had a problem.
Swigert and Lovell reporting theincident on April 14, 1970 [2:59]"Houston, we've had a problem"
Problems playing this file? See media help.
After TLI, Swigert performed the separation and transposition maneuvers before docking the CSM Odyssey tothe LM Aquarius, and the spacecraft pulled away from the third stage.[99] Ground controllers then sent thethird stage on a course to impact the Moon in range of the Apollo 12 seismometer, which it did just over threedays into the mission.[100]
The crew settled in for the three-day trip to Fra Mauro. At 30:40:50 into the mission, with the TV camerarunning, the crew performed a burn to place Apollo 13 on a hybrid trajectory. The departure from a free-returntrajectory meant that if no further burns were performed, Apollo 13 would miss Earth on its return trajectory,rather than intercept it, as with a free return.[101] A free return trajectory could only reach sites near the lunarequator; a hybrid trajectory, which could be started at any point after TLI, allowed sites with higher latitudes,such as Fra Mauro, to be reached.[102] Communications were enlivened when Swigert realized that in the last-minute rush, he had neglected to file his federal income tax return (due April 15), and amid laughter frommission controllers, asked how he could get an extension. He was found to be entitled to a 60-day extension forbeing out of the country at the deadline.[103]
Entry into the LM to test its systems had been scheduled for 58:00:00; when the crew awoke on the third day ofthe mission, they were informed it had been moved up three hours and was later moved up again byanother hour. A television broadcast was scheduled for 55:00:00; Lovell, acting as emcee, showed theaudience the interiors of Odyssey and Aquarius.[104] The audience was limited since none of thetelevision networks were carrying the broadcast,[105] forcing Marilyn Lovell (Jim Lovell's wife) to go tothe VIP room at Mission Control if she wanted to watch her husband and his crewmates.[106]
About six and a half minutes after the TV broadcast – approaching 56:00:00 – Apollo 13 was about180,000 nautical miles (210,000 mi; 330,000 km) from Earth.[107] Haise was completing the shutdownof the LM after testing its systems while Lovell stowed the TV camera. Jack Lousma, the CAPCOM, sentminor instructions to Swigert, including changing the attitude of the craft to facilitate photography ofComet Bennett.[107][108]
The pressure sensor in one of the SM's oxygen tanks had earlier appeared to be malfunctioning, so SyLiebergot (the EECOM, in charge of monitoring the CSM's electrical system) requested that the stirringfans in the tanks be activated. Normally this was done once daily; a stir would destratify the contents ofthe tanks, making the pressure readings more accurate.[107] The Flight Director, Kranz, had Liebergotwait a few minutes for the crew to settle down after the telecast,[109] then Lousma relayed the request toSwigert, who activated the switches controlling the fans,[107] and after a few seconds turned them offagain.[108]
Ninety-five seconds after Swigert activated those switches,[109] the astronauts heard a "pretty largebang", accompanied by fluctuations in electrical power and the firing of the attitude controlthrusters.[110][111] Communications and telemetry to Earth were lost for 1.8 seconds, until the systemautomatically corrected by switching the high-gain S-band antenna, used for translunarcommunications, from narrow-beam to wide-beam mode.[112] The accident happened at 55:54:53(03:08 UTC on April 14; 10:08 PM EST, April 13). Swigert reported 26 seconds later, "Okay,Houston, we've had a problem here," echoed at 55:55:42 by Lovell, "Houston, we've had aproblem. We've had a Main B Bus undervolt."[107] William Fenner was the guidance officer(GUIDO) who was the first to report a problem in the control room to Kranz.[107]
Lovell's initial thought on hearing the noise was that Haise had activated the LM's cabin-repressurization valve, which also produced a bang (Haise enjoyed doing so to startle hiscrewmates), but Lovell could see that Haise had no idea what had happened. Swigert initially thought that a meteoroid might have struck theLM, but he and Lovell quickly realized there was no leak.[113] The "Main Bus B undervolt" meant that there was insufficient voltage produced bythe SM's three fuel cells (fueled by hydrogen and oxygen piped from their respective tanks) to the second of the SM's two electric powerdistribution systems. Almost everything in the CSM required power. Although the bus momentarily returned to normal status, soon both buses Aand B were short on voltage. Haise checked the status of the fuel cells and found that two of them were dead. Mission rules forbade enteringlunar orbit unless all fuel cells were operational.[114]
In the minutes after the accident, there were several unusual readings, showing that tank 2 was empty and tank 1's pressure slowly falling, thatthe computer on the spacecraft had reset and that the high-gain antenna was not working. Liebergot initially missed the worrying signs fromtank 2 following the stir, as he was focusing on tank 1, believing that its reading would be a good guide to what was present in tank 2, as didcontrollers supporting him in the "back room". When Kranz questioned Liebergot on this, he initially responded that there might be falsereadings due to an instrumentation problem; he was often teased about that in the years to come.[17] Lovell, looking out the window, reported "agas of some sort" venting into space, making it clear that there was a serious problem.[115]
Accident
28:21
2:59
This depiction of a direct abort (from a 1966planning report) contemplates returning from apoint much earlier in the mission, and closer toEarth, than where the Apollo 13 accidentoccurred.
NASA – Apollo 13 Lunar Mission – Views Of TheMoon (2:24)
The Apollo 13 crew photographed theMoon out of the Lunar Module.
Since the fuel cells needed oxygen to operate, when Oxygen Tank 1 ran dry, the remaining fuel cell would shut down, meaning the CSM's onlysignificant sources of power and oxygen would be the CM's batteries and its oxygen "surge tank". These would be needed for the final hours ofthe mission, but the remaining fuel cell, already starved for oxygen, was drawing from the surge tank. Kranz ordered the surge tank isolated,saving its oxygen, but this meant that the remaining fuel cell would die within two hours, as the oxygen in tank 1 was consumed or leakedaway.[114] The volume surrounding the spacecraft was filled with myriad small bits of debris from the accident, complicating any efforts to usethe stars for navigation.[116] The mission's goal became simply getting the astronauts back to Earth alive.[117]
The lunar module had charged batteries and full oxygen tanks for use on the lunar surface, soKranz directed that the astronauts power up the LM and use it as a "lifeboat"[17] – a scenarioanticipated but considered unlikely.[118] Procedures for using the LM in this way had beendeveloped by LM flight controllers after a training simulation for Apollo 10 in which the LM wasneeded for survival, but could not be powered up in time.[117] Had Apollo 13's accident occurredon the return voyage, with the LM already jettisoned, the astronauts would have died,[119] as theywould have following an explosion in lunar orbit, including one while Lovell and Haise walked onthe Moon.[120]
A key decision was the choice of return path. A "direct abort" would use the SM's main engine (theService Propulsion System or SPS) to return before reaching the Moon. However, the accidentcould have damaged the SPS, and the fuel cells would have to last at least another hour to meet itspower requirements, so Kranz instead decided on a longer route: the spacecraft would swingaround the Moon before heading back to Earth. Apollo 13 was on the hybrid trajectory which wasto take it to Fra Mauro; it now needed to be brought back to a free return. The LM's DescentPropulsion System (DPS), although not as powerful as the SPS, could do this, but new softwarefor Mission Control's computers needed to be written by technicians as it had never beencontemplated that the CSM/LM spacecraft would have to be maneuvered from the LM. As the CMwas being shut down, Lovell copied down its guidance system's orientation information andperformed hand calculations to transfer it to the LM's guidance system, which had been turnedoff; at his request Mission Control checked his figures.[117][121] At 61:29:43.49 the DPS burn of34.23 seconds took Apollo 13 back to a free return trajectory.[122]
The change would get Apollo 13 back to Earth in about four days' time – though with splashdownin the Indian Ocean, where NASA had few recovery forces. Jerry Bostick and other FlightDynamics Officers (FIDOs) were anxious both to shorten the travel time and to move splashdownto the Pacific Ocean, where the main recovery forces were located. One option would shave 36hours off the return time, but required jettisoning the SM; this would expose the CM's heat shieldto space during the return journey, something for which it had not been designed. The FIDOs alsoproposed other solutions. After a meeting involving NASA officials and engineers, the seniorindividual present, Manned Spaceflight Center director Robert R. Gilruth, decided on a burn using theDPS that would save 12 hours and land Apollo 13 in the Pacific. This "PC+2" burn would take place twohours after pericynthion, the closest approach to the Moon.[117] At pericynthion on April 14, the crew ofApollo 13 was 400,171 kilometers (248,655 mi) from Earth,[123][note 5] setting the record for the furthesthumans from Earth until Artemis II's lunar flyby in 2026.[125] The record was set because the Moon wasnearly at its furthest from Earth during the mission, and the capsule's free return trajectory took itfurther from the Moon than the other Apollo missions.
While preparing for the burn, the crew was told that the S-IVB had impacted the Moon as planned,leading Lovell to quip, "Well, at least something worked on this flight."[126][127] Kranz's White team ofmission controllers, who had spent most of their time supporting other teams and developing theprocedures urgently needed to get the astronauts home, took their consoles for the PC+2 procedure.[128]
Normally, the accuracy of such a burn could be assured by checking the alignment Lovell had transferredto the LM's computer against the position of one of the stars astronauts used for navigation, but the lightglinting off the many pieces of debris accompanying the spacecraft made that impractical. The astronautsaccordingly used the one star available whose position could not be obscured – the Sun. Houston also informed them that the Moon would becentered in the commander's window of the LM as they made the burn, which was almost perfect – less than 0.3 meters (1 foot) per secondoff.[126] The burn, at 79:27:38.95, lasted four minutes and 23 seconds.[129] The crew then shut down most LM systems to conserveconsumables.[126]
The LM carried enough oxygen, but that still left the problem of removing carbon dioxide, which was absorbed by canisters of lithium hydroxidepellets. The LM's stock of canisters, meant to accommodate two astronauts for 45 hours on the Moon, was not enough to support threeastronauts for the return journey to Earth.[130] The CM had enough canisters, but they were of a different shape and size to the LM's, henceunable to be used in the LM's equipment. Engineers on the ground devised a way to bridge the gap, using plastic covers ripped from procedure
Looping around the Moon
2:25
Return to Earth
Swigert with the rig improvised to adaptthe CM's lithium hydroxide canisters foruse in the LM
Lovell tries to rest in the frigid spacecraft
manuals, duct tape, and other items available on the spacecraft.[131][132] NASA engineers referred to theimprovised device as "the mailbox".[133] The procedure for building the device was read to the crew byCAPCOM Joseph Kerwin over the course of an hour, and was built by Swigert and Haise; carbon dioxidelevels began dropping immediately. Lovell later described this improvisation as "a fine example ofcooperation between ground and space".[134]
The CSM's electricity came from fuel cells that produced water asa byproduct, but the LM was powered by silver-zinc batterieswhich did not, so both electrical power and water (needed forequipment cooling as well as drinking) would be critical. LMpower consumption was reduced to the lowest level possible;[135]
Swigert was able to fill some drinking bags with water from theCM's water tap,[126] but even assuming rationing of personalconsumption, Haise initially calculated they would run out ofwater for cooling about five hours before reentry. This seemedacceptable because the systems of Apollo 11's LM, once jettisonedin lunar orbit, had continued to operate for seven to eight hourseven with the water cut off. In the end, Apollo 13 returned to Earth with 12.8 kilograms (28.2 lb) of waterremaining.[136] The crew's ration was 200 milliliters (6.8 fl oz) of water per person per day; the threeastronauts lost a total of 14 kilograms (31 lb) among them, and Haise developed a urinary tractinfection.[137][138] This infection was probably caused by the reduced water intake, but microgravity andeffects of cosmic radiation might have impaired his immune system's reaction to the pathogen.[139]
Inside the darkened spacecraft, the temperature dropped as low as 3 °C (38 °F).[140] Lovell considered having the crew don their spacesuits, butdecided this would be too hot. Instead, Lovell and Haise wore their lunar EVA boots and Swigert put on an extra coverall. All three astronautswere cold, especially Swigert, who had got his feet wet while filling the water bags and had no lunar overshoes because he had not beenscheduled to walk on the Moon. They were instructed not to discharge their urine to space to avoid disturbing the trajectory, so they stored it inbags. Water condensed on the walls, though any condensation that may have been behind equipment panels[141] caused no problems, partlybecause of the extensive electrical insulation improvements instituted after the Apollo 1 fire.[142] Despite all this, the crew voiced fewcomplaints.[143]
Flight controller John Aaron, along with Mattingly and several engineers and designers, devised a procedure for powering up the commandmodule from full shutdown – something never intended to be done in flight, much less under Apollo 13's severe power and time constraints.[144]
The astronauts implemented the procedure without apparent difficulty; Kranz later said their survival was partly due to their experience as testpilots in critical situations with their lives on the line.[143]
Recognizing that cold conditions combined with insufficient rest would hinder the startup of the command module before reentry, at 133 hoursinto flight Mission Control gave Lovell the okay to fully power up the LM to raise the cabin temperature, which included restarting the LM'sguidance computer. Having the LM's computer running enabled Lovell to perform a navigational sighting and calibrate the LM's InertialMeasurement Unit (IMU). With the lunar module's computer aware of its location and orientation, the command module's computer was latercalibrated in a reverse of the normal procedures used to set up the LM, shaving steps from the restart process and increasing the accuracy of thePGNCS-controlled reentry.[145]
Despite the accuracy of the transearth injection, the spacecraft slowly drifted off course, necessitating a correction. As the LM's guidance systemhad been shut down following the PC+2 burn, the crew was told to use the line between night and day on the Earth to guide them, a techniqueused on NASA's Earth-orbit missions but never on the way back from the Moon.[143] This DPS burn, at 105:18:42 for 14 seconds, brought theprojected entry flight path angle back within safe limits. Nevertheless, yet another burn was needed at 137:40:13, using the LM's reaction controlsystem (RCS) thrusters, for 21.5 seconds. The SM was jettisoned less than half an hour later, allowing the crew to see the damage for the firsttime, and photograph it. They reported that an entire panel was missing from the SM's exterior, the fuel cells above the oxygen tank shelf weretilted, that the high-gain antenna was damaged, and there was a considerable amount of debris elsewhere.[146] Haise could see possible damageto the SM's engine bell, validating Kranz's decision not to use the SPS.[143] The crew then moved out of the LM back into the CM and reactivatedits life support systems.[4]
The last problem to be solved was how to separate the lunar module a safe distance away from the command module just before reentry. Thenormal procedure, in lunar orbit, was to release the LM and then use the service module's RCS to pull the CSM away, but by this point, the SMhad already been released. Grumman, manufacturer of the LM, assigned a team of University of Toronto engineers, led by senior scientistBernard Etkin, to solve the problem of how much air pressure to leave in the docking tunnel (rather than venting it completely to space) to pushthe modules apart. The astronauts applied the solution, which was successful.[147] The LM reentered Earth's atmosphere and was destroyed, theremaining pieces falling in the deep ocean.[119][148] Apollo 13's final midcourse correction had addressed the concerns of the Atomic EnergyCommission, which wanted the cask containing the plutonium oxide intended for the SNAP-27 RTG to land in a safe place. The impact point wasover the Tonga Trench in the Pacific, one of its deepest points, and the cask sank 10 kilometers (6 mi; 5 nmi) to the bottom. Later helicoptersurveys found no radioactive leakage.[143]
Reentry and splashdown
Apollo 13 splashes down in the SouthPacific on April 17, 1970
Nobody believes me, but during this six-dayodyssey, we had no idea what an impressionApollo 13 made on the people of Earth. Wenever dreamed a billion people were following uson television and radio, and reading about us inbanner headlines of every newspaper published.We still missed the point on board the carrier IwoJima, which picked us up, because the sailorshad been as remote from the media as we were.Only when we reached Honolulu did wecomprehend our impact: there we foundPresident Nixon and [NASA Administrator] Dr.Paine to meet us, along with my wife Marilyn,Fred's wife Mary (who, being pregnant, also hada doctor along just in case), and bachelor Jack'sparents, in lieu of his usual airline stewardesses.
— Jim Lovell[138]
Ionization of the air around the command module during reentry would typically cause a four-minutecommunications blackout. Apollo 13's shallow reentry path lengthened this to six minutes, longer thanhad been expected; controllers feared that the CM's heat shield had failed.[149] Odyssey regained radiocontact and splashed down safely in the South Pacific Ocean, ,[150] southeast ofAmerican Samoa and 6.5 km (4.0 mi; 3.5 nmi) from the recovery ship, USS Iwo Jima.[151] Althoughfatigued, the crew was in good condition except for Haise, who had developed a serious urinary tractinfection because of insufficient water intake.[138] The crew stayed overnight on the ship and flew to PagoPago, American Samoa, the next day. They flew to Hawaii, where President Richard Nixon awarded themthe Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honor.[152] They stayed overnight, and then wereflown back to Houston.[153]
En route to Honolulu, President Nixon stopped at Houston to award the Presidential Medal of Freedomto the Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team.[154] He originally planned to give the award to NASAadministrator Thomas O. Paine, but Paine recommended the mission operations team.[155]
Worldwide interest in the Apollo program was reawakened by the incident; televisioncoverage was seen by millions. Four Soviet ships headed toward the landing area toassist if needed,[156] and other nations offered assistance should the craft have tosplash down elsewhere.[157] President Nixon canceled appointments, phoned theastronauts' families, and drove to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt,Maryland, where Apollo's tracking and communications were coordinated.[156]
The rescue received more public attention than any spaceflight to that point, otherthan the first Moon landing on Apollo 11. There were worldwide headlines, and peoplesurrounded television sets to get the latest developments, offered by networks whointerrupted their regular programming for bulletins. Pope Paul VI led a congregationof 10,000 people in praying for the astronauts' safe return; ten times that numberoffered prayers at a religious festival in India.[158] The United States Senate on April14 passed a resolution urging businesses to pause at 9:00 pm local time that eveningto allow for employee prayer.[156]
An estimated 40 million Americans watched Apollo 13's splashdown, carried live on allthree networks, with another 30 million watching some portion of the 61⁄2 hourtelecast. Even more outside the U.S. watched. Jack Gould of The New York Timesstated that Apollo 13, "which came so close to tragic disaster, in all probability unitedthe world in mutual concern more fully than another successful landing on the Moonwould have".[159]
Immediately upon the crew's return, NASA Administrator Paine and DeputyAdministrator George Low appointed a review board to investigate the accident.Chaired by NASA Langley Research Center Director Edgar M. Cortright and includingNeil Armstrong and six others,[note 6] the board sent its final report to Paine on June15.[161] It found that the failure began in the service module's number 2 oxygentank.[162] Damaged Teflon insulation on the wires to the stirring fan inside OxygenTank 2 allowed the wires to short circuit and ignite this insulation. The resulting fire increased the pressure inside the tank until the tank domefailed, filling the fuel cell bay (SM Sector 4) with rapidly expanding gaseous oxygen and combustion products. The pressure rise was sufficient topop the rivets holding the aluminum exterior panel covering Sector 4 and blow it out, exposing the sector to space and snuffing out the fire. Thedetached panel hit the nearby high-gain antenna, disabling the narrow-beam communication mode and interrupting communication with Earthfor 1.8 seconds while the system automatically switched to the backup wide-beam mode.[163] The sectors of the SM were not airtight from eachother, and had there been time for the entire SM to become as pressurized as Sector 4, the force on the CM's heat shield would have separatedthe two modules. The report questioned the use of Teflon and other materials shown to be flammable in supercritical oxygen, such as aluminum,within the tank.[164] The board found no evidence pointing to any other theory of the accident.[165]
Mechanical shock forced the oxygen valves closed on the number 1 and number 3 fuel cells, putting them out of commission.[166] The suddenfailure of Oxygen Tank 2 compromised Oxygen Tank 1, causing its contents to leak out, possibly through a damaged line or valve, over the next130 minutes, entirely depleting the SM's oxygen supply.[167][168] With both SM oxygen tanks emptying, and with other damage to the SM, the
21°38′24″S 165°21′42″W
Public and media reaction
Investigation and response
Review board
Oxygen tank number 2, showing heaterand thermostat unit
Panel similar to the SM Sector 4cover being ejected during a testperformed as part of theinvestigation
Redesigned oxygen tank for Apollo 14
mission had to be aborted.[169] The board praised the response to theemergency: "The imperfection in Apollo 13 constituted a near disaster,averted only by outstanding performance on the part of the crew and theground control team which supported them."[170]
Oxygen Tank 2 was manufactured by the Beech Aircraft Company ofBoulder, Colorado, as subcontractor to North American Rockwell (NAR)of Downey, California, prime contractor for the CSM.[171] It contained twothermostatic switches, originally designed for the command module's 28-volt DC power, but which could fail if subjected to the 65 volts usedduring ground testing at KSC.[172] Under the original 1962 specifications,the switches would be rated for 28 volts, but revised specifications issuedin 1965 called for 65 volts to allow for quicker tank pressurization at KSC.Nonetheless, the switches Beech used were not rated for 65 volts.[173]
At NAR's facility, Oxygen Tank 2 had been originally installed in anoxygen shelf placed in the Apollo 10 service module, SM-106, but which was removed to fix a potentialelectromagnetic interference problem and another shelf substituted. During removal, the shelf was accidentallydropped at least 5 centimeters (2 in), because a retaining bolt had not been removed. The probability of damagefrom this was low, but it is possible that the fill line assembly was loose and made worse by the fall. After someretesting (which did not include filling the tank with liquid oxygen), in November 1968 the shelf was re-installedin SM-109, intended for Apollo 13, which was shipped to KSC in June 1969.[174]
The Countdown Demonstration Test took place with SM-109 in its place near the top of the Saturn V and began on March 16, 1970. During thetest, the cryogenic tanks were filled, but Oxygen Tank 2 could not be emptied through the normal drain line, and a report was writtendocumenting the problem. After discussion among NASA and the contractors, attempts to empty the tank resumed on March 27. When it wouldnot empty normally, the heaters in the tank were turned on to boil off the oxygen. The thermostatic switches were designed to prevent theheaters from raising the temperature higher than 27 °C (80 °F), but they failed under the 65-volt power supply applied. Temperatures on theheater tube within the tank may have reached 540 °C (1,000 °F), most likely damaging the Teflon insulation.[172] The temperature gauge was notdesigned to read higher than 29 °C (85 °F), so the technician monitoring the procedure detected nothing unusual. This heating had beenapproved by Lovell and Mattingly of the prime crew, as well as by NASA managers and engineers.[175][176] Replacement of the tank would havedelayed the mission by at least a month.[137] The tank was filled with liquid oxygen again before launch; once electric power was connected, itwas in a hazardous condition.[169] The board found that Swigert's activation of the Oxygen Tank 2 fan at the request of Mission Control causedan electric arc that set the tank on fire.[177]
The board conducted a test of an oxygen tank rigged with hot-wire ignitors that caused a rapid rise in temperature within the tank, after which itfailed, producing telemetry similar to that seen with the Apollo 13 Oxygen Tank 2.[178] Tests with panels similar to the one that was seen to bemissing on SM Sector 4 caused separation of the panel in the test apparatus.[179]
For Apollo 14 and subsequent missions, the oxygen tank was redesigned, the thermostats being upgradedto handle the proper voltage. The heaters were retained since they were necessary to maintain oxygenpressure. The stirring fans, with their unsealed motors, were removed, which meant the oxygen quantitygauge was no longer accurate. This required adding a third tank so that no tank would go below halffull.[180] The third tank was placed in Bay 1 of the SM, on the side opposite the other two, and was givenan isolation valve that could isolate it from the fuel cells and from the other two oxygen tanks in anemergency and allow it to feed the CM's environmental system only. The quantity probe was upgradedfrom aluminum to stainless steel.[181]
All electrical wiring in Bay 4 was sheathed in stainless steel. The fuel cell oxygen supply valves wereredesigned to isolate the Teflon-coated wiring from the oxygen. The spacecraft and Mission Controlmonitoring systems were modified to give more immediate and visible warnings of anomalies.[180] Anemergency supply of 19 litres (5 US gal) of water was stored in the CM, and an emergency battery,identical to those that powered the LM's descent stage, was placed in the SM. The LM was modified to make transfer of power from the LM tothe CM easier.[182]
On February 5, 1971, Apollo 14's LM, Antares, landed on the Moon with astronauts Alan Shepard and Edgar Mitchell aboard, near Fra Mauro,the site Apollo 13 had been intended to explore.[183] Haise served as CAPCOM during the descent to the Moon,[184] and during the second EVA,during which Shepard and Mitchell explored near Cone crater.[185]
Changes in response
Aftermath
President Richard Nixon awarding theApollo 13 astronauts the PresidentialMedal of Freedom
The Apollo 13 command moduleOdyssey on display at the Cosmospherein Hutchinson, Kansas
Command module replica used duringthe filming of Apollo 13
None of the Apollo 13 astronauts flew in space again. Lovell retired from NASA and the Navy in 1973,entering the private sector.[186] He died in 2025 at age 97.[187] Swigert was to have flown on the 1975Apollo–Soyuz Test Project (the first joint mission with the Soviet Union) but was removed as part of thefallout from the Apollo 15 postal covers incident. He took a leave of absence from NASA in 1973 and leftthe agency to enter politics, being elected to the House of Representatives in 1982, but died of cancerbefore he could be sworn in, aged 51.[188] Haise was slated to have been the commander of the canceledApollo 19 mission, and flew the Space Shuttle Approach and Landing Tests before retiring from NASA in1979.[189]
Several experiments were completed during Apollo 13, even though the mission did not land on theMoon.[190] One involved the launch vehicle's S-IVB (the Saturn V's third stage), which on prior missionshad been sent into solar orbit once detached. The seismometer left by Apollo 12 had detected frequentimpacts of small objects onto the Moon, but larger impacts would yield more information about theMoon's crust, so it was decided that, beginning with Apollo 13, the S-IVB would be crashed into the Moon.[191] The impact occurred at 77:56:40into the mission and produced enough energy that the gain on the seismometer, 117 kilometers (73 mi) from the impact, had to be reduced.[100]
An experiment to measure the amount of atmospheric electrical phenomena during the ascent to orbit – added after Apollo 12 was struck bylightning – returned data indicating a heightened risk during marginal weather. A series of photographs of Earth, taken to test whether cloudheight could be determined from synchronous satellites, achieved the desired results.[190]
As a joke, Grumman issued an invoice to North American Rockwell, prime contractor for the CSM, for "towing" the CSM most of the way to theMoon and back. Line items included 400001 miles at $1 each (plus $4 for the first mile); $536.05 for battery charging; oxygen; and four nightsat $8 per night for an "additional guest in room" (Swigert). After a 20% "commercial discount", and a 2% discount for timely payment, the finaltotal was $312,421.24. North American declined payment, noting that it had ferried three previous Grumman LMs to the Moon withoutcompensation.[192][193][194]
The CM was disassembled for testing and parts remained in storage for years; some were used for atrainer for the Skylab Rescue Mission. The trainer was displayed at the Kentucky Science Center inLouisville, Kentucky. Max Ary of the Cosmosphere made a project of restoring Odyssey and it is ondisplay at the museum in Hutchinson, Kansas.[195]
Apollo 13 was called a "successful failure" by Lovell.[196] Mike Massimino, a Space Shuttle astronaut,stated that Apollo 13 "showed teamwork, camaraderie and what NASA was really made of".[120] Theresponse to the accident has been repeatedly called "NASA's finest hour";[197][198][199][200] it is stillviewed that way.[120] Author Colin Burgess wrote, "the life-or-death flight of Apollo 13 dramaticallyevinced the colossal risks inherent in manned spaceflight. Then with the crew safely back on Earth,public apathy set in once again."[201]
William R. Compton, in his book about the Apollo Program, said of Apollo 13, "Only a heroic effort ofreal-time improvisation by mission operations teams saved the crew."[202] Rick Houston and Milt Heflin,in their history of Mission Control, stated, "Apollo 13 proved mission control could bring those space voyagers back home again when their liveswere on the line."[203] Former NASA chief historian Roger D. Launius wrote, "More than any other incident in the history of spaceflight, recoveryfrom this accident solidified the world's belief in NASA's capabilities".[204] The accident, though, convinced some officials including MannedSpaceflight Center director Gilruth, that if NASA kept sending astronauts on Apollo missions, some inevitably would be killed and they called foras quick an end as possible to the program.[204] Nixon's advisers recommended canceling remaining lunar missions, saying that a disaster inspace would cost him political capital.[205] Budget cuts made a decision easier and during the pause after Apollo 13, two missions were canceled,meaning that the program ended with Apollo 17 in December 1972.[204][206]
The 1974 movie Houston, We've Got a Problem, while set around the Apollo 13 incident, is a fictionaldrama about the crises faced by ground personnel when the emergency disrupts their work schedulesand places further stress on their lives. Lovell publicly complained about the movie, saying it was"fictitious and in poor taste".[207][208]
"Houston ... We've Got a Problem" was the title of an episode of the BBC documentary series A Life AtStake, broadcast in March 1978. This was an accurate, if simplified, reconstruction of the events.[209] In1994, during the 25th anniversary of Apollo 11, PBS released a 90-minute documentary titled Apollo 13:To the Edge and Back.[210][211]
Following the flight, the crew planned to write a book, but they all left NASA without starting it. AfterLovell retired in 1991, he was approached by journalist Jeffrey Kluger about writing a non-fiction accountof the mission. Swigert died in 1982 and Haise was no longer interested in such a project. The resultantbook, Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13, was published in 1994.[212]
Popular culture, media and 50th anniversary
In 1995, Apollo 13, a film adaptation of Lost Moon, was released, directed by Ron Howard and starring Tom Hanks as Lovell, Bill Paxton asHaise, Kevin Bacon as Swigert, Gary Sinise as Mattingly, Ed Harris as Kranz, and Kathleen Quinlan as Marilyn Lovell. James Lovell, Kranz, andother principals have stated that this film depicted the events of the mission with reasonable accuracy, given that some dramatic license wastaken. For example, the film changes the tense of Lovell's famous follow-up to Swigert's original words from, "Houston, we've had a problem" to"Houston, we have a problem".[107][213] The film also invented the phrase "Failure is not an option", uttered by Harris as Kranz in the film; thephrase became so closely associated with Kranz that he used it for the title of his 2000 autobiography.[213] The film won two of the nine AcademyAwards it was nominated for, Best Film Editing and Best Sound.[214][215]
In the 1998 miniseries From the Earth to the Moon, co-produced by Hanks and Howard, the mission is dramatized in the episode "We InterruptThis Program". Rather than showing the incident from the crew's perspective as in the Apollo 13 feature film, it is instead presented from anEarth-bound perspective of television reporters competing for coverage of the event.[216]
In 2020, the BBC World Service began airing 13 Minutes to the Moon, radio programs which draw on NASA audio from the mission, as well asarchival and recent interviews with participants. Episodes began airing for Season 2 starting on March 8, 2020, with episode 1, "Time Bomb:Apollo 13", explaining the launch and the explosion. Episode 2 details Mission Control's denial and disbelief of the accident, with other episodescovering other aspects of the mission. The seventh and final episode was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In "Delay to Episode 7", theBBC explained that the presenter of the series, medical doctor Kevin Fong, had been called into service.[217][218]
In advance of the 50th anniversary of the mission in 2020, an Apollo in Real Time site for the mission went online, allowing viewers to followalong as the mission unfolds, view photographs and video, and listen to audio of conversations between Houston and the astronauts as well asbetween mission controllers.[219] Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, NASA did not hold any in-person events during April 2020 for the flight's50th anniversary, but premiered a new documentary, Apollo 13: Home Safe, on April 10, 2020.[220] A number of events were rescheduled forlater in 2020.[221]
Lovell practices deploying theALSEP during training
 
The Apollo 13 launch vehiclebeing rolled out, December 1969
 
The "mailbox" at Mission Controlduring the Apollo 13 mission
 
Lunar Module Aquarius after itwas jettisoned above the Earth
Mission Control celebrates thesuccessful splashdown
 
The crew on board the USS IwoJima following splashdown
 
The crew speaking with PresidentNixon shortly after their return
 
Replica of the lunar plaque withSwigert's name that was to coverthe one attached to Aquarius withMattingly's name
Gallery