Wavelengths Far Ultraviolet to hard X-ray
Instruments
UVIT
SXT
LAXPC
CZTI
SSM
CPM
AstroSat is India's first dedicated multi-wavelength space telescope. It was launched on a PSLV-XL
on 28 September 2015.[1][2] With the success of this satellite, ISRO has proposed launching AstroSat-
2 as a successor for AstroSat.[3]
After the success of the satellite-borne Indian X-ray Astronomy Experiment (IXAE), which was
launched in 1996, the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) approved further development for
a full-fledged astronomy satellite, AstroSat, in 2004.[4]
A number of astronomy research institutions in India, and abroad have jointly built instruments for
the satellite. Important areas requiring coverage include studies of astrophysical objects ranging from
nearby Solar System objects to distant stars and objects at cosmological distances; timing studies of
variables ranging from pulsations of hot white dwarfs to those of active galactic nuclei can be
conducted with AstroSat as well, with time scales ranging from milliseconds to days.
AstroSat is a multi-wavelength astronomy mission on an IRS-class satellite into a near-Earth,
equatorial orbit. The five instruments on board cover the visible (320–530 nm), near UV (180–
300 nm), far UV (130–180 nm), soft X-ray (0.3–8 keV and 2–10 keV) and hard X-ray (3–80 keV and
10–150 keV) regions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
The sanctioned cost of Astrosat was ₹177.85 crore (equivalent to about 20 million USD as of March
2025).[5] Astrosat was successfully launched on 28 September 2015 from the Satish Dhawan Space
Centre on board a PSLV-XL vehicle at 10:00AM.
AstroSat is a proposal-driven general purpose observatory, with main scientific focus on:
Simultaneous multi-wavelength monitoring of intensity variations in a broad range of cosmic
sources
Monitoring the X-ray sky for new transients
Sky surveys in the hard X-ray and UV bands
Broadband spectroscopic studies of X-ray binaries, AGN, SNRs, clusters of galaxies, and stellar
coronae
Overview
Mission
Artist's conception of a binary star system
with one black hole and one main
sequence star
Tilted view of Astrosat
Studies of periodic and non-periodic variability of X-ray
sources
AstroSat performs multi-wavelength observations covering
spectral bands from radio, optical, IR, UV, and X-ray
wavelengths. Both individual studies of specific sources of
interest and surveys are undertaken. While radio, optical, and
IR observations would be coordinated through ground-based
telescopes, the high energy regions, i.e., UV, X-ray and visible
wavelength, would be covered by the dedicated satellite-borne
instrumentation of AstroSat.[6]
The mission would also study near simultaneous multi-
wavelength data from different variable sources. In a binary
system, for example, regions near the compact object emit
predominantly in the X-ray, with the accretion disc emitting
most of its light in the UV/optical waveband, whereas the
mass of the donating star is brightest in the optical band.
The observatory will also carry out:
Low- to moderate-resolution spectroscopy over a wide
energy band with the primary emphasis on studies of X-
ray-emitting objects
Timing studies of periodic and aperiodic phenomena in X-
ray binaries
Studies of pulsations in X-ray pulsars
Quasi-periodic oscillations, flickering, flaring, and other variations in X-ray binaries
Short- and long-term intensity variations in active galactic nuclei
Time-lag studies in low/hard X-rays and UV/optical radiation
Detection and study of X-ray transients.[7]
In particular, the mission will train its instruments at active galactic nuclei, which are believed to
contain super-massive black holes.[8]
The scientific payload contains six instruments.
The Ultra Violet Imaging Telescope (UVIT) performs imaging simultaneously in three channels:
130–180 nm, 180–300 nm, and 320–530 nm. The three detectors are vacuum image intensifiers
manufactured by Photek, UK.[9] The FUV detector consists of a CsI photocathode with a MgF2
input optic, the NUV detector consists of CsTe photocathode with a fused-silica input optic and the
visible detector consists of an alkali-antimonide photocathode with a fused-silica input optic. The
field of view is a circle of ~28′ diameter and the angular resolution is 1.8" for the ultraviolet
channels and 2.5″ for the visible channel. In each of the three channels a spectral band can be
selected through a set of filters mounted on a wheel; in addition, for the two ultraviolet channels a
Payloads
grating can be selected in the wheel to do slitless
spectroscopy with a resolution of ~100. The primary mirror
diameter of the telescope is 40 cm.[10]
The Soft X-ray imaging Telescope (SXT) employs focusing
optics and a deep depletion CCD camera at the focal plane to
perform X-ray imaging in the 0.3–8.0 keV band. The optics
will consist of 41 concentric shells of gold-coated conical foil
mirrors in an approximate Wolter-I configuration (the effective
area of 120 cm2). The focal plane CCD camera will be very
similar to that flown on SWIFT XRT. The CCD will be
operated at a temperature of about −80 °C by thermoelectric
cooling.[10]
The Large Area X-ray Proportional Counter (LAXPC)
covers X-ray timing and low-resolution spectral studies over a
broad energy band (3–80 keV), Astrosat will use a cluster of
3 co-aligned identical Large Area X-ray Proportional Counters (LAXPCs), each with a multi-wire-
multi-layer configuration and a Field of View of 1° × 1°. These detectors are designed to achieve
(I) wide energy band of 3–80 keV, (II) high detection efficiency over the entire energy band, (III)
narrow field of view to minimize source confusion, (IV) moderate energy resolution, (V) small
internal background and (VI) long lifetime in space. The effective area of the telescope is
6000 cm2.[10]
The Cadmium Zinc Telluride Imager (CZTI) is a hard X-ray imager. It will consist of a Pixellated
Cadmium-Zinc-Telluride detector array of 500 cm2 effective area and the energy range from 10 to
150 kev.[10] The detectors have a detection efficiency close to 100% up to 100 keV, and have a
superior energy resolution (~2% at 60 keV) compared to scintillation and proportional counters.
Their small pixel size also facilitates medium resolution imaging in hard x-rays. The CZTI will be
fitted with a two dimensional coded mask, for imaging purposes. The sky brightness distribution
will be obtained by applying a deconvolution procedure to the shadow pattern of the coded mask
recorded by the detector. Apart from spectroscopic studies, CZTI would be able to do sensitive
polarization measurements for bright galactic X-ray sources in 100–300 keV.[11]
The Scanning Sky Monitor (SSM) consists of three position sensitive proportional counters, each
with a one-dimensional coded mask, very similar in design to the All Sky Monitor on NASA's
RXTE satellite. The gas-filled proportional counter will have resistive wires as anodes. The ratio of
the output charge on either ends of the wire will provide the position of the X-ray interaction,
providing an imaging plane at the detector. The coded mask, consisting of a series of slits, will
cast a shadow on the detector, from which the sky brightness distribution will be derived.
The Charged Particle Monitor (CPM) will be included as a part of Astrosat payloads to control
the operation of the LAXPC, SXT and SSM. Even though the orbital inclination of the satellite will
be 8 deg or less, in about 2/3 of the orbits, the satellite will spend a considerable time (15–20
minutes) in the South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA) region which has high fluxes of low energy protons
and electrons. The high voltage will be lowered or put off using data from CPM when the satellite
enters the SAA region to prevent damage to the detectors as well as to minimize ageing effect in
the Proportional Counters.
The Ground Command and Control Center for Astrosat is the ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and
Command Network (ISTRAC) at Bangalore, India. Command and control of the spacecraft, and
scientific data downloads is possible during every visible pass over Bangalore. 10 out of 14 orbits per
day are visible to the ground station.[12] The satellite is capable of gathering 420 gigabits of data every
Ground support
day that can be downloaded during the 10 visible orbits by the Tracking and Data receiving center of
ISRO in Bangalore. A third 11-meter antenna at the Indian Deep Space Network (IDSN) became
operational in July 2009 to track Astrosat.
ISRO has set up a support cell for AstroSat at IUCAA, Pune. A MoU was signed between ISRO and
IUCAA in May 2016. The support cell has been set up to give opportunity to the scientific community
in making proposals on processing and usage of AstroSat data. The support cell will provide necessary
resource materials, tools, training and help to the guest observers.[13]
The Astrosat project is a collaborative effort of many different research institutions. The participants
are:
Indian Space Research Organisation
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore
Raman Research Institute, Bangalore
Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Pune
Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai
S.N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Kolkata
Presidency University, Kolkata
Canadian Space Agency
University of Leicester[14]
April 2009 : Scientists from Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR) have completed the
developmental phase of complex science payloads and have begun integrating them before
delivery of the 1,650 kg satellite Astrosat. The challenges in the design of payloads and Attitude
Control System have been overcome and in a recent review committee meeting, it was decided
that the delivery of the payload to the ISRO Satellite Centre will begin from the middle of 2009 and
continue until early 2010 to enable the launch of ASTROSAT in 2010 using ISRO workhorse
PSLV-C34.[15]
May 2015 : The integration of Astrosat is complete and final tests are under way. ISRO issued a
press release stating that "The satellite is planned to be launched during the second half of 2015
by PSLV C-34 to a 650 km near equatorial orbit around the Earth."[16]
24 July 2015: Thermovac completed. Solar panels attached. Start of final vibration tests.[10]
10 Aug 2015: All tests passed. Pre-shipment review successfully completed.[10]
28 Sep 2015: ASTROSAT has been successfully launched into orbit.[17]
AstroSat support cell
Participants
Timeline
This image of NGC 2336 was one of the
first images takes by Astrosat-1, The
Near-UV (200-300 nm) and Far-UV (130-
180 nm) images were captured by Ultra-
Violet Imaging Telescope(UVIT)
15 April 2016: The satellite has completed its performance
verification and started its operations.[18]
29 Sep 2018: The satellite has completed 3 years since its
launch in 2015. It has observed over 750 sources and
resulted in close to 100 publications in peer-reviewed
journals.[19]
29 Sep 2020: The satellite completed its mission life of 5
years and will continue to remain operational for many
years.[20]
29 September 2025 : The Satellite completed 10 years in
orbit.[21] URSC hosted a conference to commomorate the
decadal survey of satellite data in Bengaluru.[22]
A gamma-ray burst was detected by Astrosat on 5 January 2017. There was a confusion whether this
event was related to the gravitational wave signal detected by LIGO from the black hole merger event
GW170104 on 4 January 2017.[23] Astrosat helped in distinguishing between the two events. The
gamma-ray burst from 4 January 2017 was identified as a distinct supernova explosion that would
form a black hole.[23]
Astrosat also captured the rare phenomenon of a 6 billion year old small star or blue straggler feeding
off and sucking out the mass and energy of a bigger companion star.[24]
On 31 May 2017, Astrosat, Chandra X-ray Observatory and Hubble Space Telescope simultaneously
detected a coronal explosion on the nearest planet-hosting star Proxima Centauri[25][26]
On 6 November 2017 Nature Astronomy published a paper from Indian astronomers measuring the
variations of X-ray polarisation of the Crab Pulsar in the Taurus constellation.[27][28] This study was a
project conducted by scientists from Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai; the Vikram
Sarabhai Space Centre, Thiruvananthapuram; ISRO Satellite Centre Bengaluru; the Inter-University
Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Pune; and the Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad.[28]
In July 2018, Astrosat has captured an image of a special galaxy cluster that is more than 800 million
light years away from Earth. Named abell 2256 the galaxy cluster is made of three separate cluster of
galaxy that are all merging with one another to eventually form a single massive cluster in the future.
The three massive cluster contain more than 500 galaxies and the cluster is almost 100 times larger
and more than 1500 times massive as our own galaxy.[29]
On 26 September 2018, the archival data of AstroSat was publicly released.[30] As of 28 September
2018, data from AstroSat has been cited in around 100 publications in refereed journals. This figure is
expected to rise after the public release of data from AstroSat.[31]
In 2019 AstroSat observed a very rare X-ray outburst in a Be/X-ray binary system RX J0209.6-7427.
Only a couple of rare outbursts have been observed from this source hosting a neutron star. The last
outburst was detected in 2019 after about 26 years. The accreting neutron star in this Be/X-ray binary
Results
Spaceflight portal
system was found to be an ultraluminous X-ray Pulsar (ULXP) making it the second closest ULXP and
the first ULXP in our neighbouring Galaxy in the Magellanic Clouds. This source is the first ULX
pulsar discovered with the AstroSat mission and only the eight known ULX pulsar.[32][33][34]
In August 2020, AstroSat had detected extreme-UV light from a galaxy located 9.3 billion light-years
away from Earth. The galaxy called AUDFs01 was discovered by a team of Astronomers led by Kanak
Saha from the Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Pune.[35][36]
In August 2025, researchers from ISRO, Haifa University , URSC & IIT-Guwahati observed the
origins of X-ray flickering on a black hole named GRS 1915+105 and discovered that it's X-ray
brightness alternated between bright and dim phases, each lasting several hundred seconds.This
discovery will provide critical insights into how black holes interact with surrounding matter and
release energy.[37]
In 2019 a documentary titled Indian Space Dreams on the developmental journey of Astrosat, and
directed by Sue Sudbury, was released.[38]
FUV Images of the
NGC-1851 cluster
 
Messier 74 captured
by astrosat
AstroSat-2
Indian Astronomical Observatory
Indian Space Research Organisation
List of space telescopes
Ultraviolet astronomy
X-ray astronomy
In popular culture
Gallery
See also
References