Cassini–Huygens
Artist's concept of Cassini's orbit insertion around
Saturn
Names Saturn Orbiter and Titan Probe
(SOTP)
Mission type Cassini: Saturn orbiter
Huygens: Titan lander
Operator Cassini: NASA / JPL
Huygens: ESA / ASI
COSPAR ID 1997-061A
SATCAT no. 25008
Website NASA (https://saturn.jpl.nas
a.gov/)
ESA (https://www.esa.int/Ou
r_Activities/Space_Science/
Cassini-Huygens)
Mission duration Overall:
 19 years, 335 days
 13 years, 76 days at Saturn
En route:
 6 years, 261 days
Prime mission:
 3 years
Extended missions:
 Equinox: 2 years, 62 days
Cassini–Huygens
Cassini–Huygens (/kəˈsi ːni ˈhɔɪɡə nz/ k ə -SEE-
nee HOY-g ə nz), commonly called Cassini, was a
joint space-research mission by NASA, the
European Space Agency (ESA), and the Italian
Space Agency (ASI) to send a space probe to study
the planet Saturn and its system, including its
rings and natural satellites. The Flagship-class
robotic spacecraft comprised both NASA's Cassini
space probe and ESA's Huygens lander, which
landed on Saturn's largest moon, Titan.[9] Cassini
was the fourth space probe to visit Saturn and the
first to enter its orbit, where it stayed from 2004
to 2017. The two craft took their names from the
astronomers Giovanni Cassini and Christiaan
Huygens.
Launched aboard a Titan IV-B with a Centaur D-
1T upper stage on October 15, 1997, Cassini was
active in space for nearly 20 years, spending
almost 7 years in transit and 13 years orbiting
Saturn, studying the planet and its system after
entering orbit on July 1, 2004.[10]
The voyage to Saturn included flybys of Venus
(April 1998 and July 1999), Earth (August 1999),
the asteroid 2685 Masursky, and Jupiter
(December 2000). The mission ended on
September 15, 2017, when Cassini's trajectory
took it into Saturn's upper atmosphere and it
burned up[11][12] in order to prevent any risk of
contaminating Saturn's moons, which might have
offered habitable environments to stowaway
terrestrial microbes on the spacecraft.[13][14] The
mission was successful beyond expectations –
NASA's Planetary Science Division Director, Jim
Green, described Cassini–Huygens as a "mission
of firsts"[15] that revolutionized human
understanding of the Saturn system, including its
moons and rings, and our understanding of where
life might be found in the Solar System.[16]
 Solstice: 6 years, 205 days
 Finale: 4 months, 24 days
Distance travelled 7.9 billion km (4.9 billion mi)[1]
Spacecraft properties
Manufacturer Cassini: JPL
Huygens: Aerospatiale[2]
Launch mass 5,712 kg (12,593 lb)[1][3]
Dry mass 2,523 kg (5,562 lb)[1]
Power ~885 watts (at launch)[1]
~670 watts (2010)[4]
~663 watts (at end of mission)[1]
Start of mission
Launch date October 15, 1997,
08:43:00 UTC
Rocket Titan IV-B / Centaur D ‑ 1T (B-33)
Launch site Cape Canaveral, SLC-40
Contractor Lockheed Martin
End of mission
Disposal Controlled entry into Saturn[5][6]
Last contact September 15, 2017
11:55:39 UTC X-band
telemetry
11:55:46 UTC S-band radio
science[7]
Orbital parameters
Reference system Kronocentric
Flyby of Venus (Gravity assist)
Closest approach April 26, 1998
Distance 283 km (176 mi)
Flyby of Venus (Gravity assist)
Closest approach June 24, 1999
Distance 623 km (387 mi)
Flyby of Earth-Moon system (Gravity assist)
Closest approach August 18, 1999, 03:28 UTC
Distance 1,171 km (728 mi)
Flyby of 2685 Masursky (Incidental)
Closest approach January 23, 2000
Scientists and individuals from 27 countries made
up the joint team responsible for designing,
building, flying and collecting data from the
Cassini orbiter and the Huygens probe.[16]
Cassini's planners originally scheduled a mission
of four years, from June 2004 to May 2008. The
mission was extended for another two years until
September 2010, branded the Cassini Equinox
Mission. The mission was extended a second and
final time with the Cassini Solstice Mission,
lasting another seven years until September 15,
2017, on which date Cassini was de-orbited to
burn up in Saturn's upper atmosphere.[17] The
Huygens module traveled with Cassini until its
separation from the probe on December 25, 2004;
Huygens landed by parachute.[18] on Titan on
January 14, 2005. The separation was facilitated
by the SED (Spin/Eject device), which provided a
relative separation speed of 0.35 metres per
second (1.1 ft/s) and a spin rate of 7.5 rpm.[19] It
returned data to Earth for around 90 minutes,
using the orbiter as a relay. This was the first
landing ever accomplished in the outer Solar
System and the first landing on a moon other than
Earth's Moon.
At the end of its mission, the Cassini spacecraft
executed its "Grand Finale": a number of risky
passes through the gaps between Saturn and its
inner rings.[5][6] This phase aimed to maximize
Cassini's scientific outcome before the spacecraft
was intentionally destroyed[20] to prevent
potential contamination of Saturn's moons if
Cassini were to unintentionally crash into them
when maneuvering the probe was no longer
possible due to power loss or other
communication issues at the end of its
Overview
Planning and development
Distance 1,600,000 km (990,000 mi)
Flyby of Jupiter (Gravity assist)
Closest approach December 30, 2000
Distance 9,852,924 km (6,122,323 mi)
Saturn orbiter
Spacecraft
component
Cassini
Orbital insertion July 1, 2004, 02:48 UTC
Orbits 294[1]
Titan lander
Spacecraft
component
Huygens
Landing date January 14, 2005
Landing site 10.573°S 192.335°W[8]
Large Strategic Science Missions
Planetary Science Division
operational lifespan. Cassini's atmospheric entry
on Saturn ended the mission, but analysis of the
returned data will continue for many years.[16]
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which
developed the orbiter, managed the mission. The
European Space Research and Technology Centre
developed Huygens. The centre's prime
contractor, Aérospatiale of France (which became
part of Thales Alenia Space in 2005), assembled
the probe with equipment and instruments
supplied by many European countries (including
Huygens's batteries and two scientific
instruments from the United States). The Italian
Space Agency (ASI) provided the Cassini orbiter's
high-gain radio antenna, with the incorporation
of a low-gain antenna (to ensure
telecommunications with the Earth for the entire
duration of the mission), a compact and lightweight radar, which also used the high-gain antenna and
served as a synthetic-aperture radar, a radar altimeter, a radiometer, the radio science subsystem
(RSS), and the visible-channel portion VIMS-V of VIMS spectrometer.[21]
The 90s were difficult years for NASA and JPL: with the Cold War and the Space Race between the US
and the USSR finished, NASA saw dwindling budgets and introduced the so-called "faster, better,
cheaper" approach, that encouraged smaller, cheaper missions built with the help of third-party
contractors, efficiently "commercializing" the research lab and forcing it to work with
industry.[22]: 208, 254  Caltech leadership even feared that JPL could be closed.[22]: 208–209 
JPL had little experience in small missions at the time: its "flagship" missions, like Voyager, Cassini,
and Galileo, employed hundreds of people for decades. Cassini "directly supported maybe 500 work-
years, about 10 percent of total lab staff [and] provided close to 20 percent of the lab budget".[22]: 223 
In order to comply with budget restrictions and save the mission, Cassini was downsized; to save
$250 million, the scan platform had to be removed from the plans.[22]: 260–261 
NASA provided the VIMS infrared counterpart, as well as the Main Electronic Assembly, which
included electronic sub-assemblies provided by CNES of France.[23][24] On April 16, 2008, NASA
announced a two-year extension of the funding for ground operations of this mission, at which point it
was renamed the Cassini Equinox Mission.[25] It was extended again in February 2010 as the Cassini
Solstice Mission.
NASA and JPL
The mission consisted of two main elements: the ASI/NASA Cassini orbiter, named for the Italian
astronomer Giovanni Domenico Cassini, the discoverer of Saturn's ring divisions and four of its
satellites; and the ESA-developed Huygens probe, named for the Dutch astronomer, mathematician
and physicist Christiaan Huygens, discoverer of Titan.
The mission was commonly called Saturn Orbiter Titan Probe (SOTP) during gestation, both as a
Mariner Mark II mission and generically.[26]
Cassini–Huygens was a Flagship-class mission to the outer planets.[9] The other planetary flagships
include Galileo, Voyager, and Viking.[9]
Cassini had several objectives, including:[27]
Determining the three-dimensional structure and dynamic behavior of the rings of Saturn.
Determining the composition of the satellite surfaces and the geological history of each object.
Determining the nature and origin of the dark material on Iapetus's leading hemisphere.
Measuring the three-dimensional structure and dynamic behavior of the magnetosphere.
Studying the dynamic behavior of Saturn's atmosphere at cloud level.
Studying the time variability of Titan's clouds and hazes.
Characterizing Titan's surface on a regional scale.
Cassini–Huygens was launched on October 15, 1997, from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station's Space
Launch Complex 40 using a U.S. Air Force Titan IVB/Centaur rocket. The complete launcher was
made up of a two-stage Titan IV booster rocket, two strap-on solid rocket engines, the Centaur upper
stage, and a payload enclosure, or fairing.[28]
The total cost of this scientific exploration mission was about US$3.26 billion, including $1.4 billion
for pre-launch development, $704 million for mission operations, $54 million for tracking and
$422 million for the launch vehicle. The United States contributed $2.6 billion (80%), the ESA
$500 million (15%), and the ASI $160 million (5%).[29] However, these figures are from the press kit
which was prepared in October 2000. They do not include inflation over the course of a very long
mission, nor do they include the cost of the extended missions.
The primary mission for Cassini was completed on July 30, 2008. The mission was extended to June
2010 (Cassini Equinox Mission).[30] This studied the Saturn system in detail during the planet's
equinox, which happened in August 2009.[25]
On February 3, 2010, NASA announced another extension for Cassini, lasting 61⁄2 years until 2017,
ending at the time of summer solstice in Saturn's northern hemisphere (Cassini Solstice Mission). The
extension enabled another 155 revolutions around the planet, 54 flybys of Titan and 11 flybys of
Enceladus.[31] In 2017, an encounter with Titan changed its orbit in such a way that, at closest
Naming
Objectives
approach to Saturn, it was only 3,000 km (1,900 mi) above the planet's cloudtops, below the inner
edge of the D ring. This sequence of "proximal orbits" ended when its final encounter with Titan sent
the probe into Saturn's atmosphere to be destroyed.
Selected destinations (ordered largest to smallest but not to scale)
Titan
 
Earth's Moon
 
Rhea
 
Iapetus
 
Dione
 
Tethys
Enceladus
 
Mimas
 
Hyperion
 
Phoebe
 
Janus
 
Epimetheus
Prometheus
 
Pandora
 
Helene
 
Atlas
 
Pan
Telesto
 
Calypso
 
Methone
Cassini–Huygens's origins date to 1982, when the European Science Foundation and the American
National Academy of Sciences formed a working group to investigate future cooperative missions.
Two European scientists suggested a paired Saturn Orbiter and Titan Probe as a possible joint
mission. In 1983, NASA's Solar System Exploration Committee recommended the same Orbiter and
Destinations
History
Huygens's explanation for the aspects of
Saturn, Systema Saturnium (1659)
A Titan IV-B rocket and
Centaur-T upper stage with the
Cassini–Huygens payload at
LC-40, three days before its 15
October 1997 launch
Probe pair as a core NASA project. NASA and the European
Space Agency (ESA) performed a joint study of the potential
mission from 1984 to 1985. ESA continued with its own study
in 1986, while the American astronaut Sally Ride, in her
influential 1987 report NASA Leadership and America's
Future in Space, also examined and approved of the Cassini
mission.[32]
While Ride's report described the Saturn orbiter and probe as
a NASA solo mission, in 1988 the Associate Administrator for
Space Science and Applications of NASA, Len Fisk, returned
to the idea of a joint NASA and ESA mission. He wrote to his
counterpart at ESA, Roger Bonnet, strongly suggesting that
ESA choose the Cassini mission from the three candidates at
hand and promising that NASA would commit to the mission
as soon as ESA did.[33]
At the time, NASA was becoming more sensitive to the strain
that had developed between the American and European
space programs as a result of European perceptions that
NASA had not treated it like an equal during previous collaborations.
NASA officials and advisers involved in promoting and planning
Cassini–Huygens attempted to correct this trend by stressing their
desire to evenly share any scientific and technology benefits resulting
from the mission. In part, this newfound spirit of cooperation with
Europe was driven by a sense of competition with the Soviet Union,
which had begun to cooperate more closely with Europe as ESA drew
further away from NASA. Late in 1988, ESA chose Cassini–Huygens as
its next major mission and the following year the program received
major funding in the US.[34][35]
The collaboration not only improved relations between the two space
programs but also helped Cassini–Huygens survive congressional
budget cuts in the United States. Cassini–Huygens came under fire
politically in both 1992 and 1994, but NASA successfully persuaded the
United States Congress that it would be unwise to halt the project after
ESA had already poured funds into development because frustration
on broken space exploration promises might spill over into other areas
of foreign relations. The project proceeded politically smoothly after
1994, although citizens' groups concerned about the potential
environmental impact a launch failure might have (because of its plutonium power source) attempted
to derail it through protests and lawsuits until and past its 1997 launch.[36][37][38][39][40]
Diagram of Cassini
 Cassini–Huygens assembly
Cassini–Huygens original
design (Mariner Mark II, 1988)
The spacecraft was planned to be the second
three-axis stabilized, RTG-powered Mariner
Mark II, a class of spacecraft developed for
missions beyond the orbit of Mars, after the
Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby (CRAF)
mission, but budget cuts and project
rescopings forced NASA to terminate CRAF
development to save Cassini. As a result,
Cassini became more specialized. The
Mariner Mark II series was cancelled.
The combined orbiter and probe was at the
time the third-largest uncrewed
interplanetary spacecraft ever successfully
launched, behind the Phobos 1 and 2 Mars
probes, as well as being among the most complex;[41][42] NASA's Europa
Clipper became the new third-largest probe upon its launch in 2024.[43]
The orbiter had a mass of 2,150 kg (4,740 lb), the probe 350 kg (770 lb)
including 30 kg (66 lb) of probe support equipment left on the orbiter.
With the launch vehicle adapter and 3,132 kg (6,905 lb) of propellants at
launch, the spacecraft had a mass of 5,600 kg (12,300 lb).
The Cassini spacecraft was 6.8 meters (22 ft) high and 4 meters (13 ft)
wide. Its bus was a dodecagonal prism atop a conical frustum connecting
it to a cylinder containing the propellant tanks, to which the RTGs and
Huygens were attached.[44] Spacecraft complexity was increased by its
trajectory (flight path) to Saturn, and by the ambitious science at its
destination. Cassini had 1,630 interconnected electronic components,
22,000 wire connections, and 14 kilometers (8.7 mi) of cabling.[45] The
core control computer CPU was a redundant system using the MIL-STD-
1750A instruction set architecture. The main propulsion system consisted of one prime and one
backup R-4D bipropellant rocket engine. The thrust of each engine was 490 N (110 lbf) and the total
spacecraft delta-v was 2,352 m/s (5,260 mph).[46] Smaller monopropellant rockets provided attitude
control.
Cassini was powered by 32.7 kg (72 lb) of nuclear fuel, mainly plutonium dioxide (containing 28.3 kg
(62 lb) of pure plutonium).[47] The heat from the material's radioactive decay was turned into
electricity. Huygens was supported by Cassini during cruise, but used chemical batteries when
independent.
The probe contained a DVD with more than 616,400 signatures from citizens in 81 countries,
collected in a public campaign.[48][49]
Spacecraft design
Titan's surface revealed by VIMS
Rhea in front of Saturn
Until September 2017 the Cassini probe continued orbiting Saturn at a distance of between 8.2 and
10.2 astronomical units (1.23×109 and 1.53×109 km; 760,000,000 and 950,000,000 mi) from the
Earth. It took 68 to 84 minutes for radio signals to travel from Earth to the spacecraft, and vice versa.
Thus ground controllers could not give "real-time" instructions for daily operations or for unexpected
events. Even if response were immediate, more than two hours would have passed between the
occurrence of a problem and the reception of the engineers' response by the satellite.
Instruments:[51]
Optical Remote Sensing ("Located on the remote sensing
pallet")[51]
Composite Infrared Spectrometer (CIRS)
Imaging Science Subsystem (ISS)
Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrograph (UVIS)
Visual and Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (VIMS)
Fields, Particles and Waves (mostly in situ)
Cassini Plasma Spectrometer (CAPS)
Cosmic Dust Analyzer (CDA)
Ion and Neutral Mass Spectrometer (INMS)
Magnetometer (MAG)
Magnetospheric Imaging Instrument (MIMI)
Radio and Plasma Wave Science (RPWS)
Microwave Remote Sensing
Radar
Radio Science (RSS)
Cassini's instrumentation consisted of: a synthetic aperture
radar mapper, a charge-coupled device imaging system, a
visible/infrared mapping spectrometer, a composite infrared
spectrometer, a cosmic dust analyzer, a radio and plasma
wave experiment, a plasma spectrometer, an ultraviolet
imaging spectrograph, a magnetospheric imaging instrument, a magnetometer and an ion/neutral
mass spectrometer. Telemetry from the communications antenna and other special transmitters (an
S-band transmitter and a dual-frequency Ka-band system) was also used to make observations of the
atmospheres of Titan and Saturn and to measure the gravity fields of the planet and its satellites.
Cassini Plasma Spectrometer (CAPS)
Instruments
Summary
Description
Saturn's north polar hexagon[50]
Saturn in natural-color (January 2010)
Animated 3D model of the spacecraft
CAPS was an in situ instrument that measured the flux
of charged particles at the location of the spacecraft, as
a function of direction and energy. The ion composition
was also measured using a time-of-flight mass
spectrometer. CAPS measured particles produced by
ionisation of molecules originating from Saturn's and
Titan's ionosphere, as well as the plumes of Enceladus.
CAPS also investigated plasma in these areas, along
with the solar wind and its interaction with Saturn's
magnetosphere.[51][52] CAPS was turned off in June
2011, as a precaution due to a "soft" electrical short
circuit that occurred in the instrument. It was powered
on again in March 2012, but after 78 days another short
circuit forced the instrument to be shut down
permanently.[53]
Cosmic Dust Analyzer (CDA)
The CDA was an in situ instrument that measured the
size, speed, and direction of tiny dust grains near
Saturn. It could also measure the grains' chemical
elements.[54] Some of these particles orbited Saturn,
while others came from other star systems. The CDA on
the orbiter was designed to learn more about these
particles, the materials in other celestial bodies and
potentially about the origins of the universe.[51]
Composite Infrared Spectrometer (CIRS)
The CIRS was a remote sensing instrument that
measured the infrared radiation coming from objects to
learn about their temperatures, thermal properties, and
compositions. Throughout the Cassini–Huygens
mission, the CIRS measured infrared emissions from
atmospheres, rings and surfaces in the vast Saturn
system. It mapped the atmosphere of Saturn in three
dimensions to determine temperature and pressure
profiles with altitude, gas composition, and the
distribution of aerosols and clouds. It also measured
thermal characteristics and the composition of satellite
surfaces and rings.[51]
Ion and Neutral Mass Spectrometer (INMS)
The INMS was an in situ instrument that measured the
composition of charged particles (protons and heavier
ions) and neutral particles (atoms and molecules) near Titan and Saturn to learn more about
their atmospheres. The instrument used a quadrupole mass spectrometer. INMS was also
intended to measure the positive ion and neutral environments of Saturn's icy satellites and
rings.[51][55][56]
Imaging Science Subsystem (ISS)
The ISS was a remote sensing instrument that captured most images in visible light, and also
some infrared images and ultraviolet images. The ISS took hundreds of thousands of images of
Saturn, its rings, and its moons. The ISS had both a wide-angle camera (WAC) and a narrow-
angle camera (NAC). Each of these cameras used a sensitive charge-coupled device (CCD) as
its electromagnetic wave detector. Each CCD had a 1,024x1,024 square array of pixels, each
pixel 12 μm square. Both cameras allowed for many data collection modes, including on-chip
data compression, and were fitted with spectral filters that rotated on a wheel to view different
bands within the electromagnetic spectrum ranging from 0.2 to 1.1 μm.[51][57]
Dual Technique Magnetometer (MAG)
The MAG was an in situ instrument that measured the strength and direction of the magnetic
field around Saturn. The magnetic fields are generated partly by the molten core at Saturn's
center. Measuring the magnetic field is one of the ways to probe the core. MAG aimed to
develop a three-dimensional model of Saturn's magnetosphere, and determine the magnetic
state of Titan and its atmosphere, and the icy satellites and their role in the magnetosphere of
Saturn.[51][58]
Magnetospheric Imaging Instrument (MIMI)
The MIMI was both an in situ and remote sensing instrument that produces images and other
data about the particles trapped in Saturn's huge magnetic field, or magnetosphere. The in situ
component measured energetic ions and electrons while the remote sensing component (the
Ion And Neutral Camera, INCA) was an energetic neutral atom imager.[59] This information was
used to study the overall configuration and dynamics of the magnetosphere and its interactions
with the solar wind, Saturn's atmosphere, Titan, rings, and icy satellites.[51][60]
Radar
The on-board radar was an active and passive sensing instrument that produced maps of
Titan's surface. Radar waves were powerful enough to penetrate the thick veil of haze
surrounding Titan. By measuring the send and return time of the signals it is possible to
determine the height of large surface features, such as mountains and canyons. The passive
radar listened for radio waves that Saturn or its moons may emit.[51]
Radio and Plasma Wave Science instrument (RPWS)
The RPWS was an in situ instrument and remote sensing instrument that receives and
measures radio signals coming from Saturn, including the radio waves given off by the
interaction of the solar wind with Saturn and Titan. RPWS measured the electric and magnetic
wave fields in the interplanetary medium and planetary magnetospheres. It also determined the
electron density and temperature near Titan and in some regions of Saturn's magnetosphere
using either plasma waves at characteristic frequencies (e.g. the upper hybrid line) or a
Langmuir probe. RPWS studied the configuration of Saturn's magnetic field and its relationship
to Saturn Kilometric Radiation (SKR), as well as monitoring and mapping Saturn's ionosphere,
plasma, and lightning from Saturn's (and possibly Titan's) atmosphere.[51]
Radio Science Subsystem (RSS)
The RSS was a remote-sensing instrument that used radio antennas on Earth to observe the
way radio signals from the spacecraft changed as they were sent through objects, such as
Titan's atmosphere or Saturn's rings, or even behind the Sun. The RSS also studied the
compositions, pressures and temperatures of atmospheres and ionospheres, radial structure
and particle size distribution within rings, body and system masses and the gravitational field.
The instrument used the spacecraft X-band communication link as well as S-band downlink and
Ka-band uplink and downlink.[51]
Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrograph (UVIS)
The UVIS was a remote-sensing instrument that captured images of the ultraviolet light reflected
off an object, such as the clouds of Saturn and/or its rings, to learn more about their structure
and composition. Designed to measure ultraviolet light over wavelengths from 55.8 to 190 nm,
this instrument was also a tool to help determine the composition, distribution, aerosol particle
content and temperatures of their atmospheres. Unlike other types of spectrometer, this
sensitive instrument could take both spectral and spatial readings. It was particularly adept at
determining the composition of gases. Spatial observations took a wide-by-narrow view, only
one pixel tall and 64 pixels across. The spectral dimension was 1,024 pixels per spatial pixel. It
could also take many images that create movies of the ways in which this material is moved
around by other forces.[51]
Cassini UVIS instrument built by the
Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space
Physics at the University of Colorado.
VIMS spectra taken while looking through
Titan's atmosphere towards the Sun
helped understand the atmospheres of
exoplanets (artist's concept; May 27,
2014).
UVIS consisted of four separate detector channels, the
Far Ultraviolet (FUV), Extreme Ultraviolet (EUV), High
Speed Photometer (HSP) and the Hydrogen-Deuterium
Absorption Cell (HDAC). UVIS collected hyperspectral
imagery and discrete spectra of Saturn, its moons and
its rings, as well as stellar occultation data.[61]
The HSP channel is designed to observe starlight that
passes through Saturn's rings (known as stellar
occultations) in order to understand the structure and
optical depth of the rings.[62] Stellar occultation data
from both the HSP and FUV channels confirmed the
existence of water vapor plumes at the south pole of
Enceladus, as well as characterized the composition of
the plumes.[63]
Visible and Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (VIMS)
The VIMS was a remote sensing instrument that
captured images using visible and infrared light to learn
more about the composition of moon surfaces, the rings,
and the atmospheres of Saturn and Titan. It consisted of
two cameras - one used to measure visible light, the
other infrared. VIMS measured reflected and emitted
radiation from atmospheres, rings and surfaces over
wavelengths from 350 to 5100 nm, to help determine
their compositions, temperatures and structures. It also
observed the sunlight and starlight that passes through
the rings to learn more about their structure. Scientists
used VIMS for long-term studies of cloud movement and
morphology in the Saturn system, to determine Saturn's
weather patterns.[51]
Because of Saturn's distance from the Sun, solar arrays were
not feasible as power sources for this space probe.[64] To
generate enough power, such arrays would have been too large and too heavy.[64] Instead, the Cassini
orbiter was powered by three GPHS-RTG radioisotope thermoelectric generators, which use heat from
the decay of about 33 kg (73 lb) of plutonium-238 (in the form of plutonium dioxide) to generate
direct current electricity via thermoelectrics.[64] The RTGs on the Cassini mission have the same
design as those used on the New Horizons, Galileo, and Ulysses space probes, and they were designed
to have very long operational lifetimes.[64] At the end of the nominal 11-year Cassini mission, they
were still able to produce 600 to 700 watts of electrical power.[64] (Leftover hardware from the
Cassini RTG Program was modified and used to power the New Horizons mission to Pluto and the
Kuiper belt, which was designed and launched later.[65])
Electric power distribution was accomplished by 192 solid-state power switches, which also
functioned as circuit breakers in the event of an overload condition. The switches used MOSFETs that
featured better efficiency and a longer lifetime as compared to conventional switches, while at the
Plutonium power source
A Cassini GPHS-RTG before
installation
A glowing-hot plutonium pellet was the
power source for the probe's radioisotope
thermoelectric generator
same time eliminating transients. However, these solid-state circuit
breakers were prone to erroneous tripping (presumably from cosmic
rays), requiring them to reset and causing losses in experimental
data.[66]
To gain momentum while
already in flight, the trajectory
of the Cassini mission
included several gravitational
slingshot maneuvers: two fly-
by passes of Venus, one more
of the Earth, and then one of
the planet Jupiter. The
terrestrial flyby was the final
instance when the probe posed
any conceivable danger to
human beings. The maneuver
was successful, with Cassini
passing by 1,171 km (728 mi) above the Earth on August 18,
1999.[1] Had there been any malfunction causing the probe to collide with the Earth, NASA's complete
environmental impact study estimated that, in the worst case (with an acute angle of entry in which
Cassini would gradually burn up), a significant fraction of the 33 kg[47] of nuclear fuel inside the RTGs
would have been dispersed into the Earth's atmosphere so that up to five billion people (i.e. almost the
entire terrestrial population) could have been exposed, causing up to an estimated 5,000 additional
cancer deaths over the subsequent decades[67] (0.0005 per cent, i.e. a fraction 0.000005, of a billion
cancer deaths expected anyway from other causes; the product is incorrectly calculated elsewhere[68]
as 500,000 deaths). However, the chance of this happening were estimated to be less than one in one
million, i.e. a chance of one person dying (assuming 5,000 deaths) as less than 1 in 200.[67]
NASA's risk analysis to use plutonium was publicly criticized by Michio Kaku on the grounds that
casualties, property damage, and lawsuits resulting from a possible accident, as well as the potential
use of other energy sources, such as solar and fuel cells, were underestimated.[69]
The Cassini spacecraft was capable of transmitting in several different telemetry formats. The
telemetry subsystem is perhaps the most important subsystem, because without it there could be no
data return.
The telemetry was developed from the ground up, due to the spacecraft using a more modern set of
computers than previous missions.[70] Therefore, Cassini was the first spacecraft to adopt mini-
packets to reduce the complexity of the Telemetry Dictionary, and the software development process
led to the creation of a Telemetry Manager for the mission.
Telemetry
Huygens view of
Titan's surface
Same image with
different data
processing
There were around 1088 channels (in 67 mini-packets) assembled in the Cassini Telemetry
Dictionary. Out of these 67 lower complexity mini-packets, 6 mini-packets contained the subsystem
covariance and Kalman gain elements (161 measurements), not used during normal mission
operations. This left 947 measurements in 61 mini-packets.
A total of seven telemetry maps corresponding to 7 AACS telemetry modes were constructed. These
modes are: (1) Record; (2) Nominal Cruise; (3) Medium Slow Cruise; (4) Slow Cruise; (5) Orbital Ops;
(6) Av; (7) ATE (Attitude Estimator) Calibration. These 7 maps cover all spacecraft telemetry modes.
The Huygens probe, supplied by the European Space Agency
(ESA) and named after the 17th century Dutch astronomer who
first discovered Titan, Christiaan Huygens, scrutinized the
clouds, atmosphere, and surface of Saturn's moon Titan in its
descent on January 15, 2005. It was designed to enter and brake
in Titan's atmosphere and parachute a fully instrumented
robotic laboratory down to the surface.[71]
The probe system consisted of the probe itself which descended
to Titan, and the probe support equipment (PSE) which
remained attached to the orbiting spacecraft. The PSE includes
electronics that track the probe, recover the data gathered
during its descent, and process and deliver the data to the
orbiter that transmits it to Earth. The core control computer
CPU was a redundant MIL-STD-1750A control system.
The data was transmitted by a radio link between Huygens and Cassini provided by Probe Data Relay
Subsystem (PDRS). As the probe's mission could not be telecommanded from Earth because of the
great distance, it was automatically managed by the Command Data Management Subsystem
(CDMS). The PDRS and CDMS were provided by the Italian Space Agency (ASI).
After Cassini's launch, it was discovered that data sent from the Huygens probe to Cassini orbiter
(and then re-transmitted to Earth) would be largely unreadable. The cause was that the bandwidth of
signal processing electronics was too narrow and the anticipated Doppler shift between the lander and
the mother craft would put the signals out of the system's range. Thus, Cassini's receiver would be
unable to receive the data from Huygens during its descent to Titan.[20]
A work-around was found to recover the mission. The trajectory of Cassini was altered to reduce the
line of sight velocity and therefore the doppler shift.[20][72] Cassini's subsequent trajectory was
identical to the previously planned one, although the change replaced two orbits prior to the Huygens
mission with three, shorter orbits.
Huygens probe