Home /Activities/ Future Missions /Chandrayaan-3 / Chandrayaan-3 DetailsChandrayaan-3
Chandrayaan-3 is a follow-on mission to Chandrayaan-2 to demonstrate
end-to-end capability in safe landing and roving on the lunar surface. It
consists of Lander and Rover configuration. It will be launched by LVM3 from
SDSC SHAR, Sriharikota. The propulsion module will carry the lander and
rover configuration till 100 km lunar orbit. The propulsion module has
Spectro-polarimetry of Habitable Planet Earth (SHAPE) payload to study the
spectral and Polari metric measurements of Earth from the lunar orbit.
Lander payloads: Chandra’s Surface Thermophysical Experiment
(ChaSTE) to measure the thermal conductivity and temperature; Instrument
for Lunar Seismic Activity (ILSA) for measuring the seismicity around the
landing site; Langmuir Probe (LP) to estimate the plasma density and its
variations. A passive Laser Retroreflector Array from NASA is
accommodated for lunar laser ranging studies.
Rover payloads: Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer (APXS) and Laser
Induced Breakdown Spectroscope (LIBS) for deriving the elemental
composition in the vicinity of landing site.
More Details
Chandrayaan-3 consists of an indigenous Lander module (LM), Propulsion module (PM) and a Rover
with an objective of developing and demonstrating new technologies required for Inter planetary
missions. The Lander will have the capability to soft land at a specified lunar site and deploy the Rover
which will carry out in-situ chemical analysis of the lunar surface during the course of its mobility. The
Lander and the Rover have scientific payloads to carry out experiments on the lunar surface. The main
function of PM is to carry the LM from launch vehicle injection till final lunar 100 km circular polar orbit
and separate the LM from PM. Apart from this, the Propulsion Module also has one scientific payload
as a value addition which will be operated post separation of Lander Module. The launcher identified for
Chandrayaan-3 is LVM3 M4 which will place the integrated module in an Elliptic Parking Orbit (EPO) of
size ~170 x 36500 km.
The mission objectives of Chandrayaan-3 are:
1. To demonstrate Safe and Soft Landing on Lunar Surface
2. To demonstrate Rover roving on the moon and
3. To conduct in-situ scientific experiments.
To achieve the mission objectives, several advanced technologies are present in Lander such as,
1. Altimeters: Laser & RF based Altimeters
2. Velocimeters: Laser Doppler Velocimeter & Lander Horizontal Velocity Camera
3. Inertial Measurement: Laser Gyro based Inertial referencing and Accelerometer package
4. Propulsion System: 800N Throttleable Liquid Engines, 58N attitude thrusters & Throttleable Engine
Control Electronics
Chandrayaan-3
Chandrayaan-3
Details
Launch Streaming
Brochure 
 PDF -
5.6 MB
Curtain Raiser Video
LVM3 M4 Onboard
Video
Chandrayaan-3
Videos
Gallery
Appraisal
Press Release on
Aug 05, 2023
Science Results
5. Navigation, Guidance & Control (NGC): Powered Descent Trajectory design and associate
software elements
6. Hazard Detection and Avoidance: Lander Hazard Detection & Avoidance Camera and Processing
Algorithm
7. Landing Leg Mechanism.
To demonstrate the above said advanced technologies in earth condition, several Lander special tests
have been planned and carried out successfully viz.
1. Integrated Cold Test - For the demonstration of Integrated Sensors & Navigation performance test
using helicopter as test platform
2. Integrated Hot test – For the demonstration of closed loop performance test with sensors,
actuators and NGC using Tower crane as test platform
3. Lander Leg mechanism performance test on a lunar simulant test bed simulating different touch
down conditions.
The overall specifications for Chandrayaan-3 is provided below:
Sl
No.
Parameter Specifications
1. Mission Life (Lander &
Rover)
One lunar day (~14 Earth days)
2. Landing Site (Prime)4 km x 2.4 km 69.367621 S, 32.348126 E
3. Science PayloadsLander:
1. Radio Anatomy of Moon Bound Hypersensitive ionosphere and
Atmosphere (RAMBHA)
2. Chandra’s Surface Thermo physical Experiment (ChaSTE)
3. Instrument for Lunar Seismic Activity (ILSA)
4. Laser Retroreflector Array (LRA) Rover:
5. Alpha Particle X-Ray Spectrometer (APXS)
6. Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscope (LIBS) Propulsion
Module:
7. Spectro-polarimetry of HAbitable Planet Earth (SHAPE)
4. Two Module
Configuration
1. Propulsion Module (Carries Lander from launch injection to
Lunar orbit)
2. Lander Module (Rover is accommodated inside the Lander)
5. Mass 1. Propulsion Module: 2148 kg
2. Lander Module: 1752 kg including Rover of 26 kg
3. Total: 3900 kg
6. Power generation 1. Propulsion Module: 758 W
2. Lander Module: 738W, WS with Bias
3. Rover: 50W
7. Communication 1. Propulsion Module: Communicates with IDSN
2. Lander Module: Communicates with IDSN and Rover.
Chandrayaan-2 Orbiter is also planned for contingency link.
3. Rover: Communicates only with Lander.
8. Lander Sensors 1. Laser Inertial Referencing and Accelerometer Package (LIRAP)
2. Ka-Band Altimeter (KaRA)
3. Lander Position Detection Camera (LPDC)
4. LHDAC (Lander Hazard Detection & Avoidance Camera)
5. Laser Altimeter (LASA)
6. Laser Doppler Velocimeter (LDV)
7. Lander Horizontal Velocity Camera (LHVC)
8. Micro Star sensor
9. Inclinometer & Touchdown sensors
9. Lander Actuators Reaction wheels – 4 nos (10 Nms & 0.1 Nm)
10. Lander Propulsion
System
Bi-Propellant Propulsion System (MMH + MON3), 4 nos. of 800 N
Throttleable engines & 8 nos. of 58 N; Throttleable Engine Control
Electronics
11. Lander Mechanisms1. Lander leg
2. Rover Ramp (Primary & Secondary)
3. Rover
4. ILSA, Rambha & Chaste Payloads
5. Umbilical connector Protection Mechanism,
6. X- Band Antenna
12. Lander Touchdown
specifications
1. Vertical velocity: ≤ 2 m / sec
2. Horizontal velocity: ≤ 0.5 m / sec
3. Slope: ≤ 12 deg
The objectives of scientific payloads planned on Chandrayaan-3 Lander Module and Rover are
provided below:
Sl.
No
Lander Payloads Objectives
1. Radio Anatomy of Moon Bound
Hypersensitive ionosphere and
Atmosphere (RAMBHA)
Langmuir
probe (LP)
To measure the near surface plasma
(ions and electrons) density and its
changes with time
2. Chandra’s Surface Thermo physical
Experiment (ChaSTE)
To carry out the measurements of thermal properties
of lunar surface near polar region.
3. Instrument for Lunar Seismic Activity
(ILSA)
To measure seismicity around the landing site and
delineating the structure of the lunar crust and
mantle.
4. LASER Retroreflector Array (LRA) It is a passive experiment to understand the
dynamics of Moon system.
Sl.
No
Rover Payloads Objectives
1. LASER Induced
Breakdown Spectroscope
(LIBS)
Qualitative and quantitative elemental analysis & To derive the
chemical Composition and infer mineralogical composition to
further our understanding of Lunar-surface.
2. Alpha Particle X-ray
Spectrometer (APXS)
To determine the elemental composition (Mg, Al, Si, K, Ca,Ti, Fe)
of Lunar soil and rocks around the lunar landing site.
Sl.
No
Propulsion Module
Payload
Objectives
1. Spectro-polarimetry of
HAbitable Planet Earth
(SHAPE)
Future discoveries of smaller planets in reflected light would
allow us to probe into variety of Exo-planets which would qualify
for habitability (or for presence of life).