Home /Activities/ Science /Chandrayaan-1_ScienceChandrayaan-1
Chandrayaan-1, India's first mission to Moon, was launched successfully on October 22, 2008 from
SDSC SHAR, Sriharikota. The spacecraft orbited around the Moon at a height of 100 km from the
lunar surface and provided chemical, mineralogical and photo-geologic mapping of the Moon. The
spacecraft carried a total of 11 scientific instruments developed in India and other countries.
After completion of the major mission objectives, the orbit was raised to 200 km in May 2009. The
satellite made more than 3400 orbits around the moon in its life time. The mission was concluded
after the communication with the spacecraft was lost on August 29, 2009.
The payloads onboard Chandrayaan-1 are,
a. Terrain Mapping Camera (TMC)
b. Hyper Spectral Imager (HySI)
c. Lunar Laser Ranging Instrument (LLRI)
d. High Energy X - ray Spectrometer (HEX)
e. Moon Impact Probe(MIP)
f. Chandrayaan-1 X-ray Spectrometer (C1XS)
g. Near Infrared Spectrometer (SIR – 2)
h. Sub keV Atom Reflecting Analyzer (SARA)
i. Miniature Synthetic Aperature Radar (Mini SAR)
j. Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3)
k. Radiation Dose Monitor (RADOM)
a. Terrain Mapping Camera (TMC)
The aim of TMC was to map topography of both near and far side of the Moon and prepare a 3-
dimensional atlas with a high spatial and elevation resolution. TMC imaged Moon in the
panchromatic spectral region of 0.5 to 0.85 µm, with a spatial/ ground resolution of 5 m and swath
coverage of 20 km.TMC measured the solar radiation reflected / scattered from the Moon’s
surface. The dynamic range of the reflected signal was found to be quite large, represented by
the two extreme targets – fresh crust rocks and mature mare soil.
TMC payload is developed by SAC, Ahmedabad, ISRO.
b. Hyper Spectral Imager (HySI)
The objective of HySI is to obtain spectroscopic data for mineralogical mapping
of the lunar surface. The data from this instrument helped in improving the
available information on mineral composition of the surface of Moon. Also, the
study of data in deep crater regions/central peaks, which represents lower crust
or upper mantle material, may help in understanding the mineralogical
composition of Moon’s interior.
The uniqueness of the HySI was in its capability of mapping the lunar surface in 64 contiguous
bands in the VNIR, the spectral range of 0.4-0.95 µm region with a spectral resolution of better
than 15 nm and spatial resolution of 80 m, with swath coverage of 20 km. HySI collected the
Sun’s reflected light from the Moon’s surface through a tele-centric refractive optics and focus on
to an APS area detector for this purpose.
The dispersion was achieved by using a wedge filter so as to reduce the weight and compactness
of the system compared to using a prism / grating. The wedge filter was an interference filter with
varying thickness along one dimension so that the transmitted spectral range varies in that
direction. The wedge filter was placed in close proximity to an area detector. Thus, different pixels
in a row of the detector received irradiance from the same spectral region but different spatial
regions in the across track direction. In the column direction of the detector, different rows
received irradiance of different spectral as well as spatial regions in the along track direction. The
full spectrum of a target was obtained by acquiring image data in push broom mode, as the
satellite moves along the column direction of the detector. An Active Pixel Sensor (APS) area
array detector with built-in digitizer mapped the spectral bands. The payload mass was 2.5 kg and
its size is 275 mm x 255 mm x 205 mm.HySI payload is developed by SAC, ISRO
c. Lunar Laser Ranging Instrument (LLRI)
The objective of LLRI was to provide ranging data for determining the height
difference between the spacecraft and the lunar surface. LLRI worked on the
time-Of-Flight (TOF) principle. In this method, a coherent pulse of light from a
high power laser is directed towards the target whose range is to be measured.
A fraction of the light is scattered back in the direction of the laser source where
an optical receiver collects it and focuses it on to a photoelectric detector.
By accurately measuring the roundtrip travel time of the laser pulse, highly accurate range/spot
elevation measurements can be made. LLRI consisted of a 10 mJ Nd:YAG laser with 1064 nm
wave source operating at 10 Hz pulse repetition mode. The reflected laser pulse from the lunar
surface is collected by a 200 mm Ritchey-Chrétien Optical receiver and focused on to a Silicon
Avalanche Photodetector. The output of the detector was amplified and threshold detected for
generating range information to an accuracy < 5m. ihFour constant fraction discriminators provided
the slope information in addition to range information. The different modes of operation of LLRI and
the range computations from the detector output were controlled and computed by a FPGA based
electronics. The processed outputs of LLRI was used for generating high accuracy lunar
topography. The payload mass was 11.37 kg with base plate.LLRI payload is developed by LEOS,
ISRO.
d. Energy X - ray Spectrometer (HEX)
The scientific objectives of HEX was to:
I. Identify excess 210Pb in lunar polar regions deposited there as a result of
transport of gaseous 222Rn, a decay product of 238U from other regions of
the Moon. This will enable us to understand transport of other volatiles such
as water to the polar regions.
II. Detect other radioactive emissions, to characterise various lunar terrains for
their chemical and radioactive composition on the basis of
specific/integrated signal in the 30-270 keV region.
III. Explore the possibility of identifying polar regions covered by thick water-ice
deposit from a study of the continuum background
HEX covers the hard X-ray region from 30 keV to 270 keV. The experiment is designed primarily
to study the emission of low energy (30-270 keV) natural gamma-rays from the lunar surface due
to 238U and 232Th and their decay chain nuclides. The geometric detector area of 144 cm2 was
realized by nine Cadmium Zinc Telluride (CZT) arrays, each 4 cm x 4 cm (5 mm thick), composed
of 256 (16x16) pixels (size: 2.5 mm x 2.5 mm). Each CZT array was readout using two closely
mounted Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs), which provided self-triggering capability.
The detector was biased at the cathode with –550 V and the electronic charge signals were
collected at the anode. A Cesium Iodide (CsI (Tl)) scintillator crystal coupled to photomultiplier
tubes (PMT), was used as the anticoincidence system (ACS).
A specially designed collimator provided a field of view (FOV) of 33 km X 33 km at the lunar
surface from a 100 km orbit. The spatial resolution of HEX was 33 km and the mass was 14.4 kg.
e. Moon Impact Probe(MIP)
The impact probe of 35 kg mass was attached at the top deck of the main orbiter and released
during the final 100 km x 100 km orbit at a predetermined time to impact at a pre-selected
location. During the descent phase, it was spin-stabilized. The total flying time from release to
impact on Moon was around 25 minutes.
The primary objective was to demonstrate the technologies required for landing the probe at a
desired location on the Moon and to qualify some of the technologies related to future soft landing
missions.
There were three instruments on the Moon Impact Probe
i. Radar Altimeter – for measurement of altitude of the Moon Impact Probe and for qualifying
technologies for future landing missions. The operating frequency band is 4.3 GHz ± 100 MHz
ii. Video Imaging System – for acquiring images of the surface of the Moon during the descent at a
close range. The video imaging system consists of analog CCD camera
iii. Mass Spectrometer – for measuring the constituents of tenuous lunar atmosphere during descent.
This instrument was a commercially available Quadrupole mass spectrometer with a mass
resolution of 0.5 amu and sensitivities to partial pressure of the order of 10-14 torr.
The dimension of the impact probe is 375 mm x 375 mm x 470 mm.
f. Chandrayaan-1 X-ray Spectrometer (C1XS)
The primary goal of the C1XS instrument was to carry out high quality X-ray
spectroscopic mapping of the Moon, in order to constrain solutions to key
questions on the origin and evolution of the Moon. C1XS used X-ray
fluorescence spectrometry (1.0-10 keV) to measure the elemental abundance,
and map the distribution, of the three main rock forming elements: Mg, Al and Si.
During periods of enhanced solar activity (solar flares) events, it determined the
abundance of minor elements
such as Ca, Ti and Fe on the surface of the Moon.The instrument utilised technologically
innovative Swept Charge Device (SCD) X-ray sensors, which were mounted behind low profile
gold/copper collimators and aluminium/polycarbonate thin film filters. The system had the virtue of
providing superior X-ray detection, spectroscopic and spatial measurement capabilities, while also
operating at near room temperature. A deployable proton shield protected the SCDs during
passages through the Earth’s radiation belts, and from major particle events in the lunar orbit. In
order to record the incident solar X-ray flux at the Moon, which was needed to derive absolute
lunar elemental surface abundances, C1XS also included an X-ray Solar Monitor. With its wide
field-of-view of ± 52 degrees, XSM provides observation of the solar X-ray spectrum from 1-20
keV with good energy resolution (< 250 keV[at]5[dot]9 keV) and fast spectral sampling at 16 s
intervals. The total mass of C1XS and XSM was 5.2 kg
The C1XS instrument is primarily based on the D-CIXS instrument on the ESA SMART-1 mission.
Chandrayaan-1 X-ray Spectrometer (C1XS) is realised primarily through ESA funds with partial
support from ISRO. The hardware has been developed at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK
in collaboration with the ISRO Satellite Centre, Bangalore and exhibits significant improvements
over the instrument flown on SMART-1.
g. Near Infrared Spectrometer (SIR - 2)
The objective of SIR-2 was to address the surface-related aspects of lunar science in the
following broad categories:
Analyse the lunar surface in various geological/mineralogical and
topographical units;
Study the vertical variation in composition of crust
Investigate the process of basin, maria and crater formation on the
Moon;
Explore “Space Weathering” processes of the lunar surface
Survey mineral lunar resources for future landing sites and
exploration
SIR-2 was a grating NIR point spectrometer working in the 0.93-2.4 microns wavelength range
with 6 nm spectral resolution. It collected the Sun’s light reflected by the Moon with the help of a
main and a secondary mirror. This light is fed through an optical fiber to the instrument’s sensor
head, where it was reflected off a dispersion grating. The dispersed light reaches a detector,
which consisting of a row of photosensitive pixels that measured the intensity as a function of
wavelength and produces an electronic signal, which is read out and processed by the
experiment’s electronics.The mass of the instrument was 3.3 kg and the instrument unit
dimension is 260 mm x 171 mm x 143 mm.
SIR-2 is developed by the Max-Planck-Institute for Solar System Science, through the Max-
Planck Society, Germany and ESA.
h. Sub keV Atom Reflecting Analyzer (SARA)
SARA imaged the Moon surface using low energy neutral atoms as diagnostics in the energy
range 10 eV - 3.2 keV to address the following scientific objectives:
Imaging the Moon’s surface composition including the permanently shadowed areas and
volatile rich areas
Imaging the solar wind-surface interaction
Imaging the lunar surface magnetic anomalies
The SARA instrument consisted of neutral atom sensor CENA
(Chandrayaan-1 Energetic Neutrals Analyzer), solar wind monitor SWIM
and DPU (Data Processing Unit). CENA and SWIM interface with DPU,
which in turn interfaces with the spacecraft. The masses of CENA,
SWIM and DPU
are 2 kg, 0.5 kg and 2 kg respectively, totaling the SARA mass as 4.5 kg.SARA is realised through
ESA, in collaboration with Swedish Institute of Space Physics, Sweden and Space Physics
Laboratory, Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, ISRO. The Data Processing Unit of this payload/
experiment is designed and developed by ISRO, while Swedish Institute of Space Physics
develops the payload.
i. Miniature Synthetic Aperature Radar (Mini SAR)
The objective of Mini-SAR was to detect water ice in the permanently shadowed
regions on the Lunar poles, upto a depth of a few meters.An onboard SAR at
suitable incidence would allow viewing of all permanently shadowed areas on
the Moon, regardless of whether sunlight is available or the

angle is not satisfactory. The radar would observe these areas at incidence angle near 45 degrees,
recording echoes in both orthogonal senses of received polarization, allowing ice to be optimally
distinguished from dry lunar surface.The Mini-SAR radar system operated as an
altimeter/scatterometer, radiometer, and as a synthetic aperture radar imager. The Mini-SAR
system transmitted Right Circular Polarization (RCP) and received, both Left Circular polarization
(LCP) and RCP. In scatterometer mode, the system measured the RCP and LCP response in the
altimetry footprint, along the nadir ground track. In radiometer mode, the system measured the
surface RF emissivity, allowing determination of the near normal incidence Fresnel reflectivity.
Meter-scale surface roughness and circular polarization ratio (CPR) wre determined for this
footprint. This allowed the characterization of the radar and physical properties of the lunar surface
(e.g., dielectric constant, porosity) for a network of points. When directed off nadir, the radar
system will image a swath parallel to the orbital track by delay/Doppler methods (SAR mode) in
both RCP and LCP.The synthetic aperture radar system worked at a frequency 2.38 GHz, with a
resolution of 75 m per pixel from 100 km orbit and its mass was 8.77 kg.Miniature Synthetic
Aperture Radar (MiniSAR) is from Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University and Naval
Air Warfare Centre, USA through NASA.
j. Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3)
The primary Science goal of M3 was to characterize and map lunar surface
mineralogy in the context of lunar geologic evolution. This translates into several
sub-topics relating to understanding the highland crust, basaltic volcanism,
impact craters, and potential volatiles. The primary exploration goal was to
assess and map lunar mineral resources at high spatial resolution to support
planning for future, targeted missions.The M3 scientific instrument was a high
throughput pushbroom imaging spectrometer, operating in 0.7 to 3.0 µm range. It
measures solar reflected energy, using a two-dimensional HgCdTe detector
array.
Sampling: 10 nanometers
Spatial resolution: 70 m/pixel [from 100 km orbit]
Field of View: 40 km [from 100 km orbit]
Mass: 8.2 kg
The spectral range 0.7 to 2.6 µm captures the absorption bands for the most important lunar
minerals. In addition, the spectral range 2.5 to 3.0 µm is critical for detection of possible volatiles
near the lunar poles. The presence of small amounts of OH or H2O can be unambiguously
identified from fundamental absorptions that occur near 3000 nm.
M3 measurements are obtained for 640 cross track spatial elements and 261 spectral elements.
This translates to 70 m/pixel spatial resolution and 10 nm spectral resolution (continuous) from a
nominal 100 km polar orbit for Chandrayaan-1. The M3 FOV is 40 km in order to allow contiguous
orbit-to-orbit measurements at the equator that will minimize lighting condition variations.Moon
Mineralogy Mapper (M3) payload is from Brown University and Jet Propulsion Laboratory, USA
through NASA
k. Radiation Dose Monitor (RADOM)
RADOM aimed to qualitatively and quantitatively characterise the radiation
environment in near lunar space, in terms of particle flux, dose rate and
deposited energy spectrum.The specific objectives are to
Measure the particle flux, deposited energy spectrum, accumulated
radiation dose rates in Lunar orbit;

Provide an estimate of the radiation dose around the Moon at different
altitudes and latitudes;
Study the radiation hazards during the Moon exploration. Data obtained will be used for the
evaluation of the radiation environment and the radiation shielding requirements of future
manned Moon missions.
Radiation exposure of crew members on future manned space flight had been recognised as an
important factor for the planning and designing of such missions. Indeed, the effects of ionising
radiation on crew health, performance and life expectancy are a limitation to the duration of man’s
sojourn in space. Predicting the effects of radiation on humans during a long-duration space
mission requires i) accurate knowledge and modelling of the space radiation environment, ii)
calculation of primary and secondary particle transport through shielding materials and through the
human body, and iii) assessment of the biological effects of the dose.The general purpose of
RADOM is to study the radiation hazards during the Moon exploration. Data obtained will be used
for the evaluation of radiation environment and radiation shielding requirements for future manned
lunar missions.RADOM was a miniature spectrometer-dosimeter containing one semiconductor
detector of 0.3 mm thickness, one charge-sensitive preamplifier and two micro controllers. The
detector weighs 139.8 mg. Pulse analysis technique is used for obtaining the deposited energy
spectrum, which is further converted to the deposited dose and flux in the silicon detector. The
exposure time for one spectrum is fixed at 30 s. The RADOM spectrometer measured the
spectrum of the deposited energy from primary and secondary particles in 256 channels. RADOM
mass was 160 g.RADOM is from Bulgarian Academy of Sciences.
Salient science results from Chandrayaan-1
1. Discovered the presence of Hydroxyl & water molecules on the lunar surface (M3), lunar
exosphere (ChACE on MIP) and sub surface water-ice deposits in the base of the craters of
permanent sun shadow region (Mini-SAR)
2. Direct’ evidence for water (H2O) in the sunlit ambience from CHACE on MIP of Chandrayaan-
I.
3. Reflection of solar wind protons as neutral hydrogen from lunar surface (SARA)
4. Three dimensional conceptualization of many craters of interest and detailed maps of lunar
surface features (TMC and LLRI).
5. Detection of potential site (buried lava tube) for future human habitability on the Moon (TMC
and HySI). This may provide a safe environment from hazardous radiations, micro-meteoritic
impacts, extreme temperatures and dust storms.
6. Detection of potential site (buried lava tube) for future human habitability on the Moon (TMC
and HySI). This may provide a safe environment from hazardous radiations, micro-meteoritic
impacts, extreme temperatures and dust storms.
7. Evidences of volcanic vent, lava pond and lava channels as recent as 100 million years old
inside the Tycho crater central peak (TMC and NASA’s LRO data).
8. Enhanced signatures of OH/ Water in Compton Belkovich Volcanic Complex, which indicates
the endogenic water inherited during the formation of the Moon, now coming out with
Volcanism (M3 spectra).
Address