Home /Activities/ Science /Chandrayaan-2Chandrayaan-2
The Chandrayaan-2 mission was successfully launched on 22nd July 2019 at
14:43 hrs by GSLV MkIII-M1 from Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC),
Sriharikota. After a series of Earth bound manoeuvres, the spacecraft entered into
Lunar Transfer Trajectory (LTT) on August 14th. Lunar Orbit Insertion (LOI)
manoeuvre was performed on August 20th, thereby Chandrayaan-2 was
successfully inserted into the elliptical orbit around the Moon. This was followed
by a series of Lunar bound orbit maneuvers for reducing the orbit to circular polar
orbit around the Moon.
Chandrayaan-2 Orbiter is currently in a 100 km x 100 km orbit around the Moon
On September 2nd, Vikram lander separated from the Orbiter and de-orbiting
maneuver was performed to reduce the orbit to 35 km x 101 km. Vikram landing
was attempted on 7th September and it followed the planned descent trajectory
from its orbit of 35 km to around 2 km above the surface. Communication with
lander and ground station was lost. All the systems and sensors of the Lander
functioned excellently until this point and proved many new technologies such as
variable thrust propulsion technology used in the Lander. However, the Orbiter is
healthy and all the payloads are operational.
Chandrayaan-2 carried eight experiment payload on board for studying surface geology,
composition and exospheric measurements of Moon. These measurements will continue to
enhance upon the understanding built from previous lunar missions.
Handbook of Chandrayaan 2 Payloads Data & Science. 
 PDF 12 MB
1. Chandrayaan-2 Large Area Soft X-ray Spectrometer (CLASS)
CLASS measures the Moon’s X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) spectra to
examine the presence of major elements such as Magnesium,
Aluminium, Silicon, Calcium, Titanium, Iron, and Sodium. The XRF
technique will detect these elements by measuring the characteristic X-
rays they emit when excited by solar X-ray emission. CLASS is a non-
imaging spectrometer with gold coated copper collimators defining the
field of view of each detector as 7 deg X 7 deg Full Width at Half
Maximum (FWHM). This translates to a 12.5 km X 12.5 km footprint at
the 100 km altitude of the spacecraft. Aluminium door to protect the
sensors from the high energy particle flux in the radiation belts en-route
to the Moon also houses radioactive isotopes with a Titanium foil for
calibration onboard.
2. Solar X-ray Monitor (XSM)
XSM detects X-rays emitted by the Sun and its corona, measures its
intensity, and supports the CLASS payload. It provides the solar X-ray
spectrum in the energy range of 1-15 keV incident on the lunar surface.
XSM provides high energy resolution and high-cadence measurements

(full spectrum every second) as input for analysis of data from CLASS.
The XSM is operating in the lunar orbit from 12th September 2019. The
XSM provides disk integrated solar spectra in the energy range of 1 – 15
keV with a spectral resolution of better than 180 eV at 5.9 keV, which is
the best available among similar instruments that carried out such
measurements till now. The XSM also offers the highest time cadence
for such instruments: full spectrum every second and light curves in
three energy bands every 100 ms. The unique design features of the
XSM allows observations over a wide dynamic range of X-ray fluxes
from the quiet Sun to X-class flares. Presently, the XSM is the only
instrument operational providing soft X-ray spectral measurements of
the Sun over a broad energy range.
3. CHandra’s Atmospheric Compositional Explorer 2 (CHACE 2)
CHACE 2 will expand upon the CHACE experiment on Chandrayaan-1.
It is a Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer (QMA) capable of studies of the
lunar neutral exosphere in the mass range of 1 to 300 amu with the
mass resolution of ~0.5 amu. CHACE 2’s primary objective is to carry
out an in-situ study of the composition and distribution of the lunar
neutral exosphere and its variability. The CHACE-2 instrument consists
of the sensor probe (cylindrical in shape) and the electronics. The
sensor probe consists of a built-in electron impact ionizer along with a
Bayard-Alpert collector to measure the total pressure; a set of four
quadrupole rods and a detector assembly. The detector assembly
consists of a Faraday Cup (FC) and a Channel Electron Multiplier
(CEM).
4. Dual Frequency Synthetic Aperture Radar (DFSAR)
The dual frequency (L and S) SAR will provide enhanced capabilities compared to Chandrayaan-
1’s S-band mini SAR in areas such as:
L-band for greater depth of penetration (About 5m — twice that of S-band)
Circular and full polarimetry — with a range of resolution options (2-75 m) and incident
angles (9°-35°) — for understanding scattering properties of permanently shadowed regions
The main scientific objectives of this payload are:
Quantitative estimation of water-ice in the polar regions
High-resolution lunar mapping in the polar regions
Estimation of regolith thickness and its distribution
The Dual Frequency Synthetic Aperture Radar (DFSAR) on board
Chandrayaan-2 Orbiter is a microwave imaging instrument in L- and S-
band frequencies and the first fully-polarimetric SAR to study the Moon.
L-band frequency enables double the surface penetration capability with
respect to what is obtained using S-band. The instrument is basically
two SAR systems (for L & S bands) sharing a common antenna aperture
with wide bandwidth.
Various instrument features like high-efficiency transmitter, low-noise high-gain receiver, onboard
range-compression (first for any ISRO SAR mission) have enabled a highly sensitive instrument
with polarimetric capability. Its best resolution (2m in slant-range) is one order better than the
previously flown SARs to the Moon. The backscattered signals from the targets are coherently
measured by the DFSAR in different polarizations to enable studies of physical and dielectric
properties of the lunar surface/ shallow-subsurface. With these polarimetric measurements, the
instrument primarily aims to unambiguously address the presence of water-ice in permanently
shadowed regions (PSRs), characterizing the physical and dielectric properties of lunar surface,
volcanic features, impact craters and their associated ejecta.
5. Imaging Infra-Red Spectrometer (IIRS)
Imaging Infra-Red Spectrometer (IIRS) is a hyper-spectral optical imaging instrument. This
instrument maps geomorphology and mineralogy of lunar surface. The mission is intended to
cover the Moon surface. The prime objectives of IIRS are:
Global mineralogical and volatile mapping of the Moon in the spectral range of ~0.8-5.0 μm
for the first time, at the high resolution of ~20 nm
Complete characterization of water/hydroxyl feature near 3.0 μm for the first time at high
spatial (~80 m) and spectral (~20 nm) resolutions
IIRS measures the reflected solar radiation along with the emissions
from the lunar surface at an altitude of 100 km on a polar circular orbit at
a spatial resolution of ~80 m and spectral resolution of ~20-25 nm
across the spectral range of 0.8-5.0 μm in ~250 spectrally contiguous
bands. The diagnostic absorption features of major and minor lunar
minerals are found to occur in the spectral domain of ~0.75-2.5 μm that
fall well within the spectral range of IIRS thereby making their detection
possible by the spectrometer. On the other hand, the spectral range of
~2.5-3.3 μm is being dedicatedly used to detect the presence of lunar
OH/H2O features having fundamental absorptions around 3.0 μm.
6. Terrain Mapping Camera (TMC 2)
TMC 2 is a miniature version of the Terrain Mapping Camera on
Chandrayaan-1 mission. Its primary objective is to map the lunar surface
in the panchromatic spectral band (0.5-0.8 microns) with a high spatial
resolution of 5 m and a swath of 20 km from 100 km lunar polar orbit.
The data collected by TMC 2 will give us clues about the Moon’s
evolution and help us prepare 3D maps of the lunar surface. This
camera enables in preparing global high resolution image mosaic and
Digital Elevation Model (DEM).
7. Orbiter High Resolution Camera (OHRC)
OHRC provides high-resolution images of the landing site which ensure
the Lander’s safe touchdown by detecting any craters or boulders, prior
to separation. The images it captures, taken from two different look
angles, serve dual purposes. First, these images are used to generate
DEMs (Digital Elevation Models) of the landing site. Second, they are
used for scientific research after its initial role in the landing phase.
OHRC’s images can capture the same area on the lunar surface from
two different orbits. The coverage area in this case is of 12 km x 3 km
with ground resolution of 0.32 m. OHRC is an optical camera system
based on Time Delay Integration (TDI) imaging sensors with 12000
detectors. It has 4 TDI settings and 7 different integration times.
8. Dual Frequency Radio Science (DFRS) Experiment
To study the temporal evolution of electron density in the Lunar
ionosphere. Two coherent signals at X (8496 MHz), and S (2240 MHz)
band are transmitted simultaneously from satellite, and received at
ground-based receivers. DFRS is a radio science experiment used to
analyze the planetary/lunar atmosphere ionosphere. It uses two highly

correlated radio frequencies in X- and S-bands. Since there is no need
for any specific data to be sent for the DFRS experiment, the signals
allocated for tele-command and ranging can also be used to carry out
the said experiment.
Major results from Chandrayaan-2
Science results from Chandrayaan-2 payloads were documented and released to public on the
occasion of two-year completion of the mission. In addition to this, few science results from
payloads are provided below.
CHandra’s Atmospheric Composition Explorer-2 (CHACE-2) onboard
Chandrayaan-2 orbiter is a quadrupole based neutral mass
spectrometer aimed at observing the tenuous Lunar exospheric
composition from spacecraft altitude. Argon-40 (Ar-40) is a noble gas in
the lunar exosphere, understood to be originated from the radiogenic
potassimum-40 and it had been detected by several previous missions,
mostly covering the equatorial and low-latitude regions of Moon. The
CHACE-2 not only made observations over the low-latitude regions, but
also covered the other latitude regions as well, in-situ from a polar orbit,
for the first time. Figure 2 shows the map of the surface densities of Ar-
40 estimated from CHACE-2 observations. The Ar-40 distribution is
depicted both in terms of Solar longitudes (Fig. 1a) and Selenographic
longitudes (Fig. 1b), covering both low- and mid-latitude regions. The
observations show that the diurnal trend agrees with LACE/Apollo
observations from the low latitude region on the lunar surface. In
addition, CHACE-2 observations show for the first time that these
features extend to the mid-latitude regions. Further, the number density
of Ar-40 is seen to exhibit significant spatial heterogeneity. CHACE-2
observations showed Ar-40 enhancements over certain longitude
sectors including KREEP (Potassium, Rare Earth Elements and
Phosphorous rich region on the Moon) region and the South Pole Aitken
(SPA) terrain. These observations call for a deeper understanding of the
surface-exosphere interactions and source distribution.
Lunar lobate scarps are relatively small-scale tectonic landforms that are interpreted to be the
surface expression of low angle thrust faults. Lobate scarps are believed to be young lunar
landforms and are observed both in the mare and highland regions. A plausible lobate scarp
(Length is 1416 m and average relief across this scarp is 24 m) was mapped by the Terrain
Mapping Camera (TMC-2). This NW-SE oriented scarp is located between Dorsa Geike and
Dorsa Mawson. It is estimated that this lobate scarp could have been formed in the Copernican
period. Image acquisition at low Sun elevation angle provides opportunity to map the features
having smaller dimensions such as lobate scarps.

a. Ortho image of TMC-2 of lobate scarp region. The plausible Lobate scarp (yellow colored
line), craters (red colored circles) used for surface age estimation and Hanging Wall (HW),
Foot Wall (FW) are indicated by blue polygons. Profiles P1-P4 are shown in the red colored
lines.
b. Topographic cross-sections along the profiles P1-P4.
XSM is carrying out broadband spectroscopy of the Sun from lunar orbit. Currently XSM is the
only X-ray spectrometer in the world which regularly measures the soft X-ray spectrum of the Sun
with the highest time cadence. This has yielded very interesting observations of the microflares
occurring outside active region as well as elemental abundances in the quiet Sun corona. XSM
has also observed number of B-class flares and their analysis has yielded unprecedented
observations of variation of the elemental abundances during such flares
XSM observed nine B-class flares ranging from B1.3 to B4.5 during the minimum phase of Solar
Cycle 24. The evolution of temperature, emission measure, and absolute elemental abundances
of four elements Mg, Al, Si, and S are examined. These are the first measurements of absolute
abundances during such small flares and this study offers a unique insight into the evolution of
absolute abundances as the flares evolve. The results demonstrate that the abundances of these
four elements decrease towards their photospheric values during the peak phase of the flares.
During the decay phase, the abundances are observed to quickly return to their pre-flare coronal
values as shown in below figure.
The six panels show the results of the time resolved X-ray spectroscopy for a representative flare.
Panels a-b show the variation of temperature and emission measure, respectively, during flare
activity, whereas panels c-f show the variation of elemental abundances of Mg (c), Al (d), Si (e), S
(f) in logarithmic scale.