Chin. J. Astron. Astrophys. Vol. 3 (2003), Suppl., 64–74
(http:/ /www.chjaa.org)
Chinese Journal of
Astronomy and
Astrophysics
The Hubble Space Telescope: Past, Present, and Future
Nino Panagia ⋆
ESA/Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Dri ve, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
Abstract I present and illustrate some of the most recent HST results and the
plans for future observations, including the current studi es of solar system plan-
ets, the extensive imaging of the Helix Nebula, the detectio n of superluminally
expanding light echoes around the newly discovered variabl e star V838 Mon, the
repeated measurements of the collision of SN 1987A ejecta wi th its inner circum-
stellar ring, that show a marked increase of high energy inte ractions, the study of
M31 halo stellar populations and the puzzle of their origin, and the plans for the
ACS Ultra-Deep Field observations that will probe the Universe to an unprece-
dented depth.
Key words: planets and satellites: individual (Mars, Neptune) — plane tary
nebulae: individual (NGC 7293) — novae, cataclysmic variab les — supernovae:
individual (1987A) — galaxies: halos — cosmology: early uni verse
1 INTRODUCTION
At fourteen years of age, the “middle-aged” Hubble Space Tel escope ( HST) is still playing a
major role in astronomical research and is undoubtedly one o f the most important and most
proliﬁc space astronomy missions.
HST is a cooperative program of the National Aeronautics and Spa ce Administration
(NASA) and the European Space Agency (ESA) to operate a long- lived space-based observa-
tory for the beneﬁt of the international astronomical commu nity. HST is an observatory ﬁrst
conceived in the 1940s, designed and built in the 1970s and 80 s, and become operational in the
1990s. HST was designed to be a diﬀerent type of mission – a long term spac e-based observa-
tory, whose instrumentation and equipment were planned to b e serviced at a regular three year
cycle.
HST was deployed in low-Earth orbit ( ∼ 600 km) by the crew of the space shuttle Discovery
(STS-31) on 25 April 1990. Although at the beginning the miss ion looked severely faulted
because the spherical aberration, the ﬁrst maintenance mis sion STS-61 Endeavour, December
1993) fully restored the functionality of HST. In fact, all HST servicing missions so far, i.e. SM1
in December 1993, SM2 in February 1997, SM3A in December 1999 , and SM3B in February-
March 2002 were enormous successes.
HST’s current science instruments include three cameras, the W ide Field - Planetary
Camera 2 ( WFPC2), the new Advanced Camera for Surveys ( ACS), which with its tenfold
⋆ E-mail: panagia@stsci.edu
HST: Past, Present & Future 65
increase in eﬃciency and its doubled ﬁeld of view relative to WFPC2 has opened up much an-
ticipated new capabilities for discovery, the Near Infrare d Camera - Multiobject Spectrograph
(NICMOS), which was revived in mission 3B with the installation of a m echanical cooling
system, one spectrograph, the Space Telescope Imaging Spec trograph ( STIS ), and the Fine
Guidance Sensors ( FGS, primarily used for astrometric observations). Another se rvicing mis-
sion is planned for May 2005 (SM4), which includes the instal lation of the Cosmic Origins
Spectrograph (COS, a high-resolution UV spectrograph) and the Wide Field Came ra 3 ( WFC3,
with imaging capabilities extending from the near-UV to the near-IR). Because of the extraor-
dinary scientiﬁc results obtained so far and expected in the years to come, in late 1997 the
length of the HST mission was extended ﬁve more years with respect to the origi nal 15-year
design life, so that in the current plan HST is to be operated until the year 2010.
That extension was decided when the James Webb Space Telesco pe (JWST), the near/mid-
infrared successor of HST (Panagia 2003, this volume), was expected to be launched in 2 007,
while currently the launch of JWST is planned for late 2011. It follows that, if now one wants to
assure a substantial overlap of the two missions, a further HST extension should be envisaged
which would require an additional servicing mission. Howev er, servicing missions by the shuttle
are expensive and inherently dangerous, and, therefore, NA SA decided to assess the scientiﬁc
impact of its current plan for eﬀecting the transition from HST to JWST in the context of its
overall space science program, and to determine if there are modiﬁcations to this plan that may
better address key scientiﬁc issues within the constraints provided by the agency’s strategic
plan and budget. To this end in mid-2003 NASA Oﬃce of Space Sci ence chartered a panel of
senior community members, with John Bahcall serving as chai r, to review agency plans and to
receive community input on the HST-JWST transition topic.
After a broad consultation with the astronomical community at large, extensive discussions
with scientiﬁc and engineering experts, and following a mee ting with selected representatives of
the HST and JWST projects, the panel issued their report 1 which is very positive about HST,
its contributions, and the desirability of keeping it funct ioning as a scientiﬁc facility as long as
possible. Actually the report, while favoring an extension of HST lifetime past 2010 in view of
a partial, at least, overlap with the JWST mission, considers a number of possible of diﬀerent
scenarios, from having two missions (a SM4 in 2005 and a SM5 in about 2010) to dismissing any
further maintenance mission altogether, and for all of them recommends actions to maximize
the scientiﬁc outcome of the HST mission, whatever the decision, mostly dictated by budgeta ry
and safety considerations, could be. Therefore, with a dose of cautious optimism and a grain of
realism, we could expect that, budget permitting , the HST mission may be extended even past
2010.
In the following sections I shall review some of the telescop e’s most recent results and
outline some of the planned observations for the near future . Summaries of previous years most
exciting HST results can be found in Panagia (1999, 2002).
2 MARS’S CLOSE ENCOUNTER WITH EAR TH
On August 27, 2003, the third and fourth planets from the Sun, namely the Earth and Mars,
were at their closest encounter in recorded human history.
The reason why the two planets were unusually close is opposi tion. Approximately every
two years, the Earth’s orbit catches up to Mars’s orbit, alig ning the Sun, Earth, and Mars in a
straight line, so that Mars and the Sun are on opposite sides o f Earth. The fact that Earth’s orbit
is nearly circular ( eEarth = 0 .0167) while Mars’ is more markedly elliptical ( eMars = 0 .0934)
results in Earth-Mars approaches ranging between 56 and 100 million kilometers. In late August
1 http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/features/MP Public Reports.html
66 N. Panagia
Earth was near aphelion and Mars at perihelion, thus being se parated by a distance of a mere
55.8 million kilometers, the shortest in about 60,000 years .
During past oppositions, many famous observations were mad e of the Red Planet. An
opposition in November 1659 made it possible for Christiaan Huygens to see and sketch the
ﬁrst accurate drawings of the Martian surface, which showed a major dark feature on the planet
now known as Syrtis Major. Although farther away than usual d uring the opposition of 1666,
Mars oﬀered Gian Domenico Cassini the ﬁrst view of its polar i ce caps. Cassini was also able
to determine the rotation period of Mars from his opposition observations. In the late 19th
century, Giovanni Schiaparelli made perhaps the most famou s observations of Mars, performing
detailed studies of those “canals”, as Father Angelo Secchi had called them about 14 years
earlier, and which, due to a misinterpretation, set the stag e for speculation about life on Mars.
Following that, during the perihelial opposition of 1877, M ars came close enough to Earth for
Asaph Hall to resolve Mars’s two small satellites, which he n amed Phobos and Deimos.
The shorter-than-usual separation of these planets also ma de summer 2003 the ideal time
to launch scientiﬁc expeditions to Mars. With such a shorter distance not as much fuel is
needed to reach Mars, which leaves more room for valuable sci entiﬁc instruments. Thus, NASA
has launched a pair of Mars Exploration Rovers (MER-A “Spiri t” on June 10 and MER-B
“Opportunity” on July 7) to land on the planet and investigat e the Martian surface. Similarly,
the European Space Agency successfully launched the Mars Ex press probe which will reach
the planet in December 2003, starting its studies of the enti re surface of the planet and its
atmosphere, and will analyze Mars’ soil with the Beagle 2 lan der.
Taking advantage of such a close opposition, a series of HST observations were planned,
some of which have already been executed (see e.g., Figure 1). In particular, a team led by Jim
Bell is carrying out a coordinated program (GO 9738) of spect roscopy, imaging, and spectropo-
larimetry of Mars during the August 2003 opposition to study the composition and physical
state of surface materials and airborne aerosols. The obser vations include (a) Moderate spec-
tral resolution 290 to 570 nm STIS long-slit push-broom imaging spectroscopy of Mars, to
constrain the properties of airborne aerosol particles and to search for and globally map iron-
bearing minerals that are diagnostic of speciﬁc past climat ic conditions; (b) WFPC2 UV-VIS
images designed primarily to quantify the eﬀects of ice and d ust aerosols on our STIS spectra;
(c) NICMOS near-IR images to search for and globally map the presence of hydrated sur-
face minerals; and (d) ACS multispectral polarizer images to provide critical phase f unction
measurements needed to constrain the physical properties o f the Martian surface layer. The
observations are timed to take full advantage of the closest approach of Mars to Earth, so that
images and spectra are acquired at a spatial scale comparabl e to existing spacecraft orbital
spectroscopy data ( ∼ 10 km/pixel) and in wavelength regions not sampled by past or current
Mars spacecraft instrumentation. These observations also provide complementary scientiﬁc and
calibration measurements in support of current and future N ASA and ESA Mars exploration
missions.
Finally, in February 2004, a last observation will be made si multaneously with the Mars
Exploration Rover Mission. August 27 ACS observations have already provided high-resolution
images of Mars (at 7.33 kilometers per pixel). All of these ob servations also provide comple-
mentary scientiﬁc and calibration measurements in support of current and future NASA and
ESA Mars exploration missions.
3 A CHANGE OF SEASONS IN NEPTUNE
Observations of Neptune made over six years show a distinct i ncrease in the amount and
brightness of the banded cloud features located mostly in th e planet’s southern hemisphere
(Sromovsky et al. 2003).
HST: Past, Present & Future 67
Neptune was already known for its violent weather, with wind s up to 1500 km/h, but the
new Hubble observations are the ﬁrst to suggest that the plan et undergoes a change of seasons.
Using Hubble, three sets of observations of Neptune were mad e, in 1996, 1998, and 2002, each
covering a full rotation of the planet. The images showed pro gressively brighter bands of clouds
encircling the planet’s southern hemisphere.
The recent trend of increasing cloud activity on Neptune has been qualitatively conﬁrmed
at near-infrared wavelengths with Keck Telescope observat ions from July 2000 to June 2001
by H. Hammel and co-workers (see e.g., Rages, Hammel & Lockwood 2002). Near-infrared
observations at NASA’s Infrared Telescope Facility on Maun a Kea, Hawaii are planned for this
summer to further characterize changes in the high-altitud e cloud structure.
Neptune rotation axis is tilted at an angle of about 29 degree s so that the northern and
southern hemispheres alternate in their positions relativ e to the Sun. Therefore, like the Earth,
Neptune would have four seasons, but, unlike the Earth, the s easons of Neptune last for decades,
not months. Actually, since Neptune obits the Sun in about 16 5 years, a single season on the
planet can last more than 40 years. If what scientists are obs erving is truly seasonal change,
the planet will continue to brighten for another 20 years.
What is remarkable is that Neptune exhibits any evidence of s easonal change at all, given
that the Sun, as viewed from the planet, is 900 times dimmer th an it is from Earth. Since the
amount of solar energy intercepted is what should determine the seasons, it is still a mystery
how can such a small energy input aﬀect the dynamic nature of N eptune’s atmosphere.
4 NGC 7293: THE HELIX NEBULA
The Helix Nebula, a.k.a. NGC 7293, lies about 200 pc away towards the constellation of Aquarius
and has a diameter of about 0.8 pc, thus spanning as much as 14 a rcminutes in the sky. Figure
3 shows an image made by combining newly released images from the HST-ACS and wide-
angle images from the Mosaic Camera on the WIYN 0.9 m Telescop e at Kitt Peak National
Observatory.
This image of the Helix Nebula is one of the largest and most de tailed celestial images
ever made. Making these HST observations was made possible by the fortuitous combinati on
of events. Among the most prominent of meteor showers is the L eonids each November. The
shower in 2002 was predicted to be especially rich and since t hose meteoroids pose a non-zero
risk to the spacecraft, HST had to carry out a special procedure to minimize the risk and a ny
consequences. As in the past several years, HST was required to be pointed in a particular
direction during the meteor shower so as to keep the telescop e’s aft end toward the stream
while minimizing the cross-section of the solar arrays. Thi s “stand down” period was from 0
to 14 hours UT on November 18, 2002. In preparing for this spec ial eﬀort, STScI staﬀ member
Ian Jordan noticed that just outside the nominal pointing re gion lied the Helix Nebula, which
had been examined by Hubble many times (see, e.g., the dramatic images of globules shown
press release STScI-1996-13). This was too good an opportun ity to miss! The HST Project
at Goddard Space Flight Center was immediately contacted an d their concurrence in using
HST slightly beyond its nominal pointing area was secured.
Then a small group of STScI scientists was set up to design a pr ogram that would make
eﬀective use of the nine orbits available. This group, led by Margaret Meixner, created a program
that imaged a substantial portion of the large Helix in two co lors, using both ACS and WFPC2,
with the intent of establishing a ﬁrst-epoch dataset that is suitable for later work to measure
proper motions of the knots. A high-quality public image, wh ich is shown in Figure 3, was also
produced, by combining all of the HST images and complementing them with images taken
with the KPNO 0.9 m WIYN telescope large-ﬁeld images. More details on these obs ervations
can be found at http://archive.stsci.edu/hst/helix/.
68 N. Panagia
5 THE MYSTERIOUS OUTBURST OF THE ST AR V838
MONOCEROTIS
The previously unknown variable star V838 Monocerotis erup ted in early 2002, brightening
suddenly by a factor of almost 10,000 at visual wavelengths. Unlike a supernova or nova, V838
Mon did not explosively eject its outer layers; rather, it si mply expanded to become a cool
supergiant with a moderate-velocity stellar wind. A series of superluminally expanding light
echoes appeared around the star shortly afterward, as illum ination from the outburst propagated
into a surrounding, pre-existing circumstellar dust cloud (see Figure 4). This is the ﬁrst light
echo seen in the Milky Way since 1936. The star and its surroun ding medium has been studied
obtaining a series of high-resolution images and polarimet ry of the light echo with the HST-ACS
(Bond et al. 2003).
The echo exhibits a series of circular arcs, whose angular ex pansion rates show that the
distance is greater than 2 kpc. The polarimetric imaging wou ld imply an even greater lower limit
to the distance of as high as 6 kpc. Both of these limits mark th e ﬁrst times that these phenomena
have been used to constrain an astronomical distance in the M ilky Way. At maximum light,
the object was extremely luminous, at least as bright as visu al absolute magnitude –9.6. The
spectrum of the star during the outburst remained that of a co ol stellar photosphere, but as
the outburst subsided a composite spectrum appeared, which revealed the presence of a B type
companion.
V838 Mon thus appears to represent a new class of stellar outb ursts, occurring in binary
systems containing a relatively hot main-sequence star and a companion that erupts to become
a cool supergiant. A remarkably similar event was seen in the Andromeda Galaxy in the late
1980’s. The presence of the circumstellar dust implies that previous eruptions have occurred,
and spectra show it to be a binary system. When combined with t he high luminosity and unusual
outburst behavior, these characteristics indicate that V8 38 Mon represents a hitherto unknown
type of stellar outburst, for which we have no completely sat isfactory physical explanation.
6 FIREWORKS IN SN 1987A EQUA TORIAL RING
Supernova 1987A exploded on 1987 February 23 in the Large Mag ellanic Cloud. Although
HST was not yet in orbit when this rare chance to observe a nearby s upernova appeared,
it took advantage of the opportunity as soon as it became oper ational. The European Space
Agency’s Faint Object Camera took the ﬁrst images of SN 1987A on 1990 August 23–24, which
revealed the supernova crowned by a glorious circumstellar ring. Later, two more rings were
discovered.
HST has kept an attentive eye on SN 1987A, and its observations ha ve produced many fun-
damental results, including a direct measure of the superno va expansion, the detailed properties
of its surrounding rings, the distance to the supernova, and the origin of the stars associated
with the supernova.
Recently, Hubble has observed the high-velocity material f rom the supernova explosion
starting to overtake and crash into the slower-moving inner ring. Figure 5 shows the dramatic
evidence of these collisions. The circumstellar ring, whic h until 1996 was relatively quiescent,
started to develop bright spots in 1997, and in May 2001 one ca n identify almost a dozen bright
spots. These bright spots are the result of the fast moving co mponent of the ejecta colliding with
the stationary equatorial ring. The fastest debris, moving at 15,000 km s − 1 or 1/20 the speed
of light, are now colliding with the slower moving gas which w as ejected when the progenitor
was a red supergiant ( e.g., Sonneborn et al. 1998).
Over the next decades, as “slower” ejecta layers reach the ri ng, more and more spots will
light up and the whole ring will shine as it did in the ﬁrst seve ral months after explosion.
HST: Past, Present & Future 71
Fig. 5 Series of images of SN 1987A and its inner circumstellar ring obtained with HST-
WFPC2 between October 1994 and May 2001. It appears that the quiesc ent ring has devel-
oped at least nine hot spots in the last ﬁve years. [Courtesy o f Peter Challis (CfA), on behalf
of the SINS project (Supernova INtensive Study, PI: R.P Kirs hner)]
Eventually, the bulk of the ejecta will completely sweep the ring up, clearing the circumstellar
space of that remnant of the pre-supernova wind activity.
7 YOUNG ST ARS IN THE ANDROMEDA HALO?
With an investment of 120 orbits of HST observing time, a team led by Tom Brown has obtained
a color-magnitude diagram (CMD) for a minor-axis ﬁeld in the halo of the Andromeda galaxy
(M31), 51 arcmin (11 kpc) from the nucleus (Brown et al. 2003). These observations, taken with
the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) on the Hubble Space Tel escope, are the deepest optical
images yet obtained (but not for long! see Section 8), attain ing 50% completeness at V = 30.7
mag (see Figures 6 and 7). The CMD, constructed from approxim ately 300,000 stars, reaches
more than 1.5 mag fainter than the old main-sequence turnoﬀ. Brown et al. analysis is based
on direct comparisons to ACS observations of four globular clusters through the same ﬁlt ers,
72 N. Panagia
Fig. 6 A 180 ′′ × 200′′ region of M31 halo, the deepest visible-light image so far ta ken in
space, observed with the HST-ACS. [Credit: NASA, ESA and T.M. Brown (STScI)]
as well as chi-squared ﬁtting to a ﬁnely-spaced grid of calib rated stellar-population models.
They ﬁnd that the M31 halo contains a major (approximately 30 % by mass) intermediate-age
(6–8 Gyr) metal-rich ([Fe/H] > −0.5) population, as well as a signiﬁcant globular-cluster age
(11–13.5 Gyr) metal-poor population.
HST: Past, Present & Future 73
Fig. 7 A sampler of extended objects detected in the M31 halo ACS images. [Credit: NASA,
ESA and T.M. Brown (STScI)]
The newly discovered younger stars in Andromeda’s halo are r icher in heavier elements than
the stars in our Milky Way’s halo, or in most of the small dwarf galaxies that surround the
Milky Way. Indeed the level of chemical enrichment seen in th ese younger stars is characteristic
of relatively massive galaxies, containing at least a billi on stars. On the other hand, since the
gas in a young giant galaxy rapidly falls into the disk, it is u nlikely that the newly revealed
intermediate-age population could be explained by star for mation continuing in the halo for
more than 6 Gyrs.
Brown et al. argue that a more plausible explanation is a merger with a lar ge satellite
galaxy when the Universe was approximately half of its prese nt age, or a series of mergers
with smaller satellites. Thus, the resulting halo appears b e a mix of stars originally formed in
the halo, disrupted-disk stars, disrupted-satellite star s, and stars formed during one or more
mergers. These results open a number of interesting new poss ibilities, but leave us with the new
question “what is the typical halo formation process?” Is it a “violent” one like that we see
occurring in Andromeda, or is it as quiescent as found in the h alo of our Milky Way galaxy?
Only further studies on more galaxies will be able to answer t his question properly.
8 AS DEEP AS EVER: THE ACS UL TRA-DEEP FIELD
The ACS Ultra Deep Field (UDF) is a public survey carried out by using Director’s
Discretionary time. The main science driver are galaxy evol ution and cosmology, including
probing the epoch of reionization up to z ∼ 6.5 and characterizing not only the colors but also
74 N. Panagia
the morphologies of faint sources. The primary instrument i s the Advanced Camera for Surveys
but WFPC2, NICMOS and STIS will also be used in parallel.
The UDF consists of a single ultra-deep ﬁeld (412 orbits in to tal) within the Chandra Deep
Field South (Giacconi et al. 2002) in the GOODS area (Giavalisco et al. 2003). The pointing
will be RA(J2000)=3 h 32m 39s.0 and Decl.(J2000)=–27 ◦47′ 29′′.1. This pointing avoids the
gaps with the lowest eﬀective exposure on the Chandra ACIS im age of CDFS, and is designed
to include in the ﬁeld both a spectroscopically conﬁrmed z = 5.8 galaxy and a spectroscopically
conﬁrmed type Ia SN at z = 1 .3. The selected UDF ﬁeld will be accessible to most major
observatories in both Northern and Southern hemispheres.
The survey will use four ﬁlters: F435W (56 orbits), F606W (56 orbits), F775W (150 orbits),
and F850LP (150 orbits). The F435W (B) and F606W (V) exposure s will be one magnitude
deeper, and the F775W (I) exposure 1.5 magnitude deeper than the equivalent HDF exposures.
The depth in F775W and F850LP is optimized for searching very red objects - like z = 6
galaxies - at the detection limit of the F850LP image.
This basic structure of the survey represents a consensus re commendation of a Scientiﬁc
Advisory Committee to the STScI Director Steven Beckwith. A local Working Group is looking
in detail at the implementation of the survey. The Phase II pl an for the UDF set of observations
is accessible on the web as DD proposal 9978. The HST observations will begin on September
24, 2003, and continue through January 16, 2004. The current plan is to release the reduced
ACS images and source catalogs by February 7, 2004, i.e. three weeks after the completion of
all HST observations.
Further details and updates can be found at http://www.stsc i.edu/science/udf/.
References
Bond H.E., et al. , 2003, Nature, 422, 405
Brown T.M., et al. , 2003, ApJ, 592, L17
Giacconi., et al. , 2002, ApJS, 139, 369
Giavalisco M., et al. , 2003, ApJ, in press [also astro-ph/0309105]
Panagia N., 1999, in “Frontier Objects in Astrophysics and P article Physics”, eds. F. Giovannelli & G.
Mannocchi, Italian Physical Society (Bologna - Italy), CP V ol. 65, p. 25-36.
Panagia N., 2002, Mem. S.A.It., 73, 889
Rages K., Hammel H.B., Lockwood G.W., 2002, Icarus, 159, 262
Sromovsky L.A., Fry P.M., Limaye S.S., Baines K.H., 2003, Ic arus, 163, 256