 1 
Abstract — The James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) is the 
scientific successor to the Hubble Space Telescope. It is a 
cryogenic infrared space observatory with a 25 m2 aperture (6 
m class) telescope that will achieve diffraction limited angular 
resolution at a wavelength o f 2 um. The science instrument 
payload includes four passively cooled near -infrared 
instruments providing broad - and narrow -band imagery, 
coronography, as well as multi -object and integral -field 
spectroscopy over  the 0.6 < λ < 5.0
 µm spectrum. An actively 
cooled mid-infrared instrument provides broad-band imagery, 
coronography, and integral-field spectroscopy over the 5.0 < 
λ < 29 µm spectrum. The JWST is being developed by NASA, 
in partnership with the European and Canadian Space 
Agencies, as a general user facility with science observations 
proposed by the international astronomical community in a 
manner similar to the Hubble Space Telescope. Technology 
development and mission design are complete. Construction, 
integration and verification testing is underway in all areas of 
the program. The JWST is on  schedule for launch during 
2021. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. DESIGNING FOR DISCOVERY .................................. 1 
2. ARCHITECTING FOR SUCCESS ................................ 3 
3. COLLECTING THE FIRST LIGHT ............................. 3 
4. EXTRACTING INFORMATION FROM STARLIGHT ... 7 
5. MAKING SURE THAT IT ALL WORKS ....................... 8 
6. REFERENCES ......................................................... 12 
 
1. DESIGNING FOR DISCOVERY 
The science motivation for the JWST mission was developed 
by a succession of international science working groups and 
is described by Gardner , et al. 2006 & 2012,  and 
Kalirai 2018 with updates maintained by the JWST flight 
science working group at: 
https://jwst.nasa.gov/science.html . 
This science case forms the basis from which detailed science 
and mission requirements were derived to guide engineering 
design and development of the JWST. The science 
observations that are implemented by the JWST will  be 
proposed by the international astronomical community in 
response to annual peer reviewed proposal opportunities 
(Rigby 2012). The discovery potential of the JWST relative 
to other concurrent facilities is discussed in Thronson, 
Stiavelli, and Tielens 2009. 
The emergence of the first sources of light in the universe 
marks the end of the “Dark Ages” in cosmic history (Rees 
1997). The ultraviolet radiation field produced by these 
sources created the ionization that is observed in the local 
intergalactic me dium (IGM). The JWST design provides 
unique capability to address key questions about this era in 
cosmic evolution including: what is the nature of the first 
galaxies; how and when did ionization of the space between 
them occur; and what sources caused the  ionization? The 
JWST architecture is primarily shaped by requirements 
associated with answering the above questions.  
In contrast to the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), the JWST 
is designed as an infrared optimized telescope to observe the 
redshifted visible and ultraviolet radiation from the first 
galaxies and supernovae of the first stars. To achieve the nJy 
sensitivity needed to observe this era (z ~ 6 -20), the 
observatory must have a telescope aperture that is larger in 
diameter than the largest rocket faring, and the entire optical 
system must be cooled to ~40 -50 K. Finally, the resulting 
large deployable cryogenic telescope must achieve HST -like 
angular resolution, but at a 4X longer wavelength thus, also 
necessitating a large diameter telescope apertur e. The major 
observatory design features (Table 1, Figure 1) trace directly 
from these requirements and differ markedly from those of  
the HST. 
The JWST science instrument payload is designed to probe 
the first galaxies with high angular resolution near -infrared 
image surveys in broad -band filters. This capability enables 
identification of primeval galaxies by searching for their 
Lyman continuum break with multi -filter photometry. This 
prominent feature occurs in the near -infrared (1.3 – 2.6 µm) 
for galaxies with redshifts in the range of 10 – 20. This broad-
band technique exploits the maximum sensitivity of the 
observatory, such that the space density of galaxies can be 
probed to z~20. JWST high angular resolution imagery across 
the 0.6 – 29 µm spectrum will  probe the assembly and 
evolution of galaxy morphologies to permit observation of 
when and how the Hubble morphological sequence formed. 
The JWST is designed to enable near -infrared multi -object 
spectroscopy of thousands of galaxies at several spectral 
The James Webb Space Telescope: Mission 
Overview and Status 
 
Matthew Greenhouse 
Goddard Space Flight Center 
Greenbelt, MD 20771 
301 286-4517 
matt.greenhouse@nasa.gov 
 2 
resolutions (~10 2, ~103). This capability will enable users to 
probe the chemical evolution and metallicity of galaxies and 
the ionization state of the IGM across cosmic time. Low 
resolution multi-object spectroscopy will facilitate calibration 
of photometric redshifts for primeval galaxy studies. The 
JWST spectrometers include integral field capability over the 
0.6 – 29 µm spectrum that will enable detailed spectral, 
morphological, and kinema tic studies of high redshift 
galaxies and local galaxy nuclei. JWST spectroscopy includes 
wide field slitless gris m spectroscopy to enable high redshift 
emission line galaxy surveys and spectroscopy of extrasolar 
planet atmospheres. 
The JWST observatory de sign enables wide discovery 
potential beyond cosmology and galaxy studies. The JWST 
high angular resolution imagery and imaging sp ectroscopy 
across the 0.6 – 29 µm spectrum will open a new window on 
observation of star formation in our own galaxy to reveal: how 
molecular cl ouds collapse; how environment a ffects star 
formation and vice -versa; the mass distribution of low mass 
stars; and the relationship between stellar debris disks and the 
formation of terrestrial planets. 
The JWST instruments include chronographic imagery, 
sparse aperture interferometry, and spectroscopy capability 
that will facilitate a wide range of stellar debris disk studies 
and extra-solar planet observations at high angular resolution. 
High dynamic range modes of the JWST instruments w ill 
enable extra-solar planet transit photometry and spectroscopy 
across the above wavelength range. The JWST observatory 
provides non -sidereal tracking so that the full observatory 
capability can be used  to observe the outer solar system to 
enable compara tive studies among stellar debris disks, 
extrasolar planets, and our own solar system. 
 
                              
Table 1: Key design parameters of the JWST and HST 
Performance Parameter HST JWST 
OTE Diameter (meters) 2.4 6.1 by 6.6 
Mass (kg) 11600 6330 
Output power at load input (watts) 2400 2079 
Unobscured Aperture (sq meters) 4.5 25 
Overall optical transmission (%) 45 to 25 62 to 43 
Telescope field of view (arc min) 14.6 (radius) 18 by 9 
Wavelength of diffraction limited performance 0.5 2 
Rayleigh radius (arc sec) 0.043 0.069 
Telescope Strehl ratio (%) 80 80 
Pointing accuracy without fine guidance (arc sec) 22 7 
Pointing stability with fine guidance (arc sec) 0.007 0.007 
Detector pixels (Mega pixels) 25 66 
Data volume (Gbits/day) 27 458 
 
                              
 
Figure 1: The JWST is the largest cryogenic optical system ever constructed 
 3 
2. ARCHITECTING FOR SUCCESS  
The large primary mirror area and cryogenic operating 
temperature are key drivers on the JWST mission 
architecture. The telescope is the largest space telescope ever 
constructed. Liquid cryogen cooling techniques used by prior 
infrared space observatories (IRAS, ISO, and Spitzer) cannot 
be practically scaled to meet JWST requirements, and existing 
cryo-cooler technology could not meet the heat lift 
requirements of this large system. As a consequence, a 
passively cooled architecture was adopted for the majority of 
the system.  
 
A libration point orbit about the Sun -Earth L2 point was 
selected to facilitate this approach to cooling the observatory 
(Figure 2). This choice enables the observatory and the earth 
to have the same period in their heliocentric orbit about the 
around the sun , such that the telecommunications range 
between the earth and the JWST remains constant throughout 
the mission. In addition, the primary sources of heat (sun and 
earth) always appear in the same direction. Hence, it is 
possible to continuously shield portions of the observatory 
from the sun and earth to provide passive cryogenic cooling.  
 
The orbit about the L2 point itself is sized to ensure that the 
JWST never enters the Earth’s shadow; thus enabling 
continuous generation of power with solar arrays. This orbit 
has a period of approximately 6 months and is unstable in the 
direction of the Earth -Sun line, requiring use of station - 
keeping thrusters. Propellant for orbit maintenance and 
momentum management ultimately limits the l ifetime of the 
observatory to approximately twice the duration of its 
required 5 year science mission. 
 
The JWST can observe the who le sky while remaining 
continuously in the shadow of its sun shield. The space 
vehicle can pitch through an angle of 50 degrees and rotate 
completely about the earth-sun line to observe sources within 
an annulus that covers approximately 35% of the sky (Fi gure 
3). As the observatory orbits the sun, this annulus sweeps over 
the whole sky every 6 months  yielding small continuous 
viewing zones at the ecliptic poles. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: The JWST can observe 35% of the sky at any 
instant while  remaining in the shadow of its sunshield. 
This annular field of regard covers the whole sky as the 
Earth orbits the Sun 
The JWST will reach this orbit in approximately 100 days 
after launch from Guiana Space Center  in French Guiana 
using an Ariane 5 ECA l aunch vehicle via a direct transfer 
trajectory. The 6.5 m diameter telescope and its tennis -court-
sized sunshield, are designed to be stowed within the 5 m 
diameter Arian e rocket fairing along with the science 
instrument payload and spacecraft  such that t he observatory 
can deploy into its operational configuration (see animation 
at: 
https://youtu.be/bTxLAGchWnA ). This process involves 
40 deployable structures and 178 release mechanisms.  The 
observatory is launched warm, and cooling begin s after 
sunshield deployment in route to the L2 point. 
 
During operations, the NASA Deep Space Network is used to 
support two 4 hr communications contacts each day during 
which approximately 458 Gbits of science data are 
downloaded. Both mission and science operations are 
supported by the Space Telescope Science Institute, which is 
currently operating the Hubble Space Telescope. Overall 
mission management, as well as guidance, navigation, and 
control, are provided by the NASA Goddard Space Flight 
Center. 
 
3. COLLECTING THE FIRST LIGHT 
A three mirror anastigmat (TMA) telescope design (Figure 4) 
was selected to provide high image quality over a wide field 
of view (Lightsey 2012). In contrast to ground -based 
telescopes, minimizing mass is a key design driver on the 
Figure 2: The location of the JWST libration point 
orbit relative to the Earth, Moon, and Sun. 
 4 
JWST telescope. Beryllium was selected as a material for the 
three TMA mirrors due to its low expansion coefficient at the 
~50K operating temperature (to enable high figure stability) , 
high thermal conductivity, and high stiffness to mass ratio. A 
segmented primary mirror design was chosen to enable fold -
up stowage (Figure 1). The deployed aperture is tricontagon 
in shape with an unobscured collecting area of 25 m 2. The 
primary mirror is composed of 18 hexagonal segments (1.32 
m flat-to-flat) of three optical prescriptions. 
Each primary mirror segment and the secondary mirror are 
mechanized to provide in -flight position adjustment in 6 
degrees of freedom. The primary mirror segments also have 
capability for in-flight radius of curvature adjustment. A fine 
steering mirror is located near a pupil position. This mirror is 
servo controlled using an image -based fine guidance sensor 
located in the science instrument focal plane to enable 7 
milliarcseconds rms pointing stability. The mirrors are 
polished to a cryogenic figure error of approximately 20 nm 
rms via an iterative polishing and cryogenic test process 
(Gallagher 2011). Gold was selected  as a mirror coating to 
provide high throughput over the 0.6 - 29 micron spectrum. 
This coating choice limits the JWST to wavelengths >0.6 um. 
The 29 µm long wavelength limit results from detector 
technology and cooling constraints.  Manufacturing, coating, 
and final cryogenic testing of all telescope mirrors has been 
completed (Figure 5). Their performance has been verified 
                         
 
 
Secondary 
Mirror
Fine 
Steering 
Mirror
Tertiary 
Mirror
Primary 
Mirror
Intermediate 
Focus
V3
V1 V2
Focal 
Surface
    
 
Figure 4: The telescope deploys into a three anastigmat configuration employing a fine  
steering mirror to enable 7 milliarcsecond line of sight pointing stability 
Figure 5: All JWST telescope mirrors are completed and are within specification in every  respect. From left to 
right: 1 of 18 primary mirror segments; the secondary mirror; the tertiary mirror; and  the fine steering mirror. 
 5 
through test to be within spe cification in every respect 
(Feinberg et al. 2012). 
 
The mirror segment actuators are periodically adjusted in 
flight to ensure diffraction limited image quality throughout 
the mission. The observatory’s main near -infrared science 
camera (Section 4) is used as the wavefront error sensor for 
this process.  In itial coarse phasing of the segments is 
accomplished using dispersed Hartman sensing optics in this 
camera (Figure 6). The subsequent fine phasing is performed 
on defocused images using a modified Gerchberg -Saxton 
algorithm (Acton 2004 & 2012). This process is designed to 
achieve a telescope Strehl ratio of 0.8 at a wavelength of 2 
um.  
 
   
  
       
Figure 6: Dispersed Hartman sensing optics within the NIRCam science instrumen t are used to perform coarse 
phasing of the primary mirror segments during flight. 
Figure 7: A 1/6th scale fully functional model of 
the JWST telescope was used to develop the 
overall telescope wavefront sensing and control 
algorithms
 
 6 
 
Figure 8: The telescope structure is complete and consists 
of more than 3200 bonded piece parts. 
The telescope structure  (Figure 8) consists of a M55J -954-6 
cyanate ester composite material that affords a high stiffness 
to mass ratio and a low cryogenic expansion coefficient to 
yield high optical alignment stability. Approximately 3,200 
bonded piece parts are assembled on a mandrel to form the 
structure. This structure must support launch loads and 
perform as a cryogenic optical metering structure. The latter 
function requires that it exhibit extremely low distortion upon 
thermal cycling over approximately 250 degrees of 
temperature cha nge from ambient to its 50K operating 
temperature. This aspect of the structure design performance 
was verified through cryogenic speckle interferometry (Saif 
2008).  
 

 7 
The observatory sunshield (Figure 9) consists of five Kapton 
layers with shape and spacing designed to reduce the incident 
solar power by a factor of order 10 6. The sun facing layer is 
coated with silicon to prevent degradation of the substrate 
over the mission duration, and the remaining layers are coated 
with aluminum. The shield is designed with a curved dihedral 
shape for attitude stability and must be wrinkle free for control 
of stray light. As a consequence, each of 5 layers is a quilt of 
50 panels that are joined with 7000 inches of seaming formed 
by thermal spot welds. The edge location of each panel is 
precisely configured to ensure that the coldest layer blocks 
infrared emission of warmer layers from impinging on the  
telescope optics. To meet this requirement, a seam -to-seam 
accuracy of 0.05 inches over the ~21 x 15 m assembly was  
achieved. Verification of the sunshield thermal design was 
achieved using a 1/3 scale fully functional model (F igure 9) 
operated in a space simulation chamber in which the L2 point 
solar radiation and edge view factors to cold space were 
simulated using lamps and cryo-panels. 
 
4. EXTRACTING INFORMATION FROM STARLIGHT 
The JWST science instrument payload contains four science 
instruments (Figure 10), a fine guidance sensor, and 
supporting systems for instrument control, command and data 
handling, cryogenic thermal control, and other functions 
(Greenhouse 2006, 2010, 2011; Lundquist 2012). Near -
infrared imagery is provided by the NIRCam instrument 
(Rieke 2005, 2008; Beichman 2012). This camera provides 
high angular resolution wide -field imagery over the 0.6 – 5 
µm spectrum. The detector pixel scale is chosen to optimally 
sample the telescope point spread function across this 
wavelength range by use of a dichroic beam splitter. Two 
identical optical modules image adjacent fields of 
approximately 4 square arc mi nutes to provide full 
redundancy for telescope wavefront sensing.  Occulting 
coronography, yielding a rejection ratio of ~10 4, is provided 
in both long and short wavelength channels. All focal plane 
arrays support high cadence sub-array exposures to provide a 
high dynamic range capability for exoplanet transit 
observations. 
 
Slit spectroscopy over the 0.6 – 5 µm spectrum is provided by 
the NIRSpec instrument (Bagnasco 2007; Ferruit 2012). The 
NIRSpec affords a range of spectral resolutions (102 < λ/∆λ < 
103) that can be used with long slit, multi-object, and integral 
field aperture control modes. This instrument is the first 
aperture controlled multi -object spectrometer developed for 
space flight. It is designed to target 100 compact sources 
simultaneously within a 9 square arc minute field. Aperture 
control for multi-object spectroscopy is provided by a n array 
of 250,000 micro-shutters that are configured for the desired 
target field based on prior NIRCam imagery. A variety of 
fixed long slits are provided to enable high contrast and 
exoplanet transit spectroscopy. Integral field spectroscopy is 
provided over a 9 square arc second field via an image slicer. 
 
Near-infrared slitless spectroscopy and non -redundant mask 
interferometry is provided by the NIRSS instrument (Doyon 
2012). This instrument provides slitless grism spectroscopy at 
spectral resolutions of approximately 150 and 700 over a 5 
square arc minute field of view. These two gris m modes are 
optimized for deep Ly -alpha galaxy surveys and high 
precision transit spectroscopy of extrasolar planets 
respectively. This instrument also provides sparse aperture 
interferometric imagery (Sivaramakrishnan 2012) via a 7 
aperture non -redundant pupil mask and three broad -band 
filters centered on 3.8, 4.3, and 4.8 mi crons wavelength over 
which the telescope point spread function is Nyquist sampled 
by the NIRISS pixel scale. 
 
The NIRSS shares an optical bench with the FGS. The latter 
is a fully redundant very broad-band (0.6 – 5 um) camera that 
functions as the fine gu idance sensor for the spacecraft 
attitude control and telescope fine steering mirror systems. It 
delivers guide star centroid measurements with a noise 
equivalent angle of 4 milliarcseconds (10-6 deg) at a rate of 16 
Hz. Its wide field of view enables 95% probability of guide 
star acquisition over the whole sky and autonomous pattern 
recognition for guide star identification. 
 
Imagery and spectroscopy over the 5 -29 µm spectrum is 
provided by the MIRI instrument (Wright 2008). This 
instrument provides broad -band imagery, low spectral 
  
 
Figure 9: Left -- A 1/3 scale fully functional model of the sunshield was used for design verification in a cryo-vacuum 
chamber equipped with solar simulator lamps; Right -- A full scale engineering model of the sunshield. 
 8 
resolution (1%) long slit spectroscopy, and medium spectral 
resolution (~10 3) integral field spectroscopy. The imaging 
mode includes both occulting and quadrant phase mask 
coronography. The latter type enables very small inner 
working angle observations of stellar debris disks and 
exoplanet systems. When used in combination with the 
NIRSpec instrument, an optimally sampled integral field 
spectrum covering the whole 0.6 – 29 µm JWST wavelength 
range can be obtained at medium spectral resolution. 
 
The detectors for the JWST instruments define the state of art 
for high performance space flight infrared imaging arrays. 
The near-infrared instruments utilize HgCdTe 4 M ega pixel 
(Mpixel) sensor chip arrays (SCA) operated at ~40 K. 
Zodiacal background limited sensitivity is achieved in all 
broad-band instrument modes over the 0.6 – 10 µm spectrum. 
The MIRI instrument utilizes Si:As 1 Mpixel SCAs operated 
at ~6.8 K. Significant gains in noise performance and SCA 
format were achieved over the prior mission state of art 
(HST/NICMOS & Spitzer/IRAC) during the JWST 
technology development phase to enable the above mission 
science goals. The near -infrared SCAs are designed to be 
edge-butted on three sides to form larger format focal plane 
array (FPA) assemblies. The NIRCam short wavelength 
channel utilizes a 16 Mpixel FPA consisting of 4 of these 
SCAs, and the NIRSpec utilizes an 8 Mpixel FPA consisting 
of 2 SCAs. The mid-infrared SCAs are used individually in 1 
Mpixel FPA assemblies. 
 
5. MAKING SURE THAT IT ALL WORKS 
Testing at the scale and operating temperature of the JWST 
requires the largest deep cryogenic (~20K) space simulation 
facilities in the world. The system is built up and tested in 
incremental steps in which each subunit is tested in a 
simulated flight environment before it is integrated into the 
next higher level of assembly (Kimble 2012 , 2018). As this 
integration and test process proceeds, larger and larger 
environmental test facilities are needed. The JWST space 
vehicle consists of three system elements: the Optical 
Telescope Element (OTE), the Integrated Science 
Figure 10: The JWST science instruments. From top to 
bottom: NIRCam, NIRSpec, MIRI, and FGS/NIRSS 
 
 
 
 
 

 9 
Instrument Module (ISIM), and the Spacecraft Element 
(which includes the sunshade). When the above proces s of 
incremental testing reached the element level of assembly, the 
largest test facilities in the world were needed.  
 
The first element-level test in the JWST Program was that of 
the ISIM. The ISIM was flight qualified at Goddard Space 
Flight Center using a high fidelity cryogenic telescope 
simulator (OSIM) (see: Hagopian 2007, Ohl 2009) and a 27 x 
40 ft cryo -vacuum chamber equipped with a ~20K helium 
shroud to enable testing at the ISIM operating temperature 
(Figure 11).  
 
The OTE structure was cryogenically tested at Marshall 
Space Flight Center (who also performed all cryogenic testing 
of the OTE primary mirror segments). The OTE  was 
integrated at Goddard (Figure 13) using the Space System 
Development and Integration Facility (SSDIF) (see: Mathews 
2015) – among the largest laminar flow clean room s in the 
world. The OTE and ISIM elements were integrated with each 
other in the SSDIF  and were then shipped to Johnson Space 
Center for end -to-end optical testing at the flight operating 
temperature in a 65 x 120 ft cr yo-vacuum chamber (Figure 
14) that has been extensively refurbished from NASA’s 
Apollo program for JWST (Feinberg 2010,  2011; Hadaway 
2018; Lightsey 2018; Irvin 2018 ). The OTE/ISIM was then 
be shipped to Northrop Grumman Aerospace Systems in 
Redondo Beach California for integration with the Spacecraft 
Element. The fully integrated JWST space vehicle will then 
be transported by ship to the European Space Agency’s 
Kourou Launch Center in French Guiana for integration with 
the Arian 5 launch vehicle. 
 
The above shipments will utilize the Space Telescope 
Transporter for Air Road and Sea (STTARS) shown in Figure 
15. For shipments between GSFC, JSC, and Northrop 
Grumman, the STTARS will be transported by a C5 aircraft. 
Transport to Kourou will utilize a ro ll-on-roll-off transport 
ship. The planned route via the Panama Canal is a journey of 
6,900 nautical miles that will require approximately 20 days 
to complete. 
 
 
Figure 11: The cryo -vacuum test configuration for the 
science instrument module (ISIM) is shown in the Space 
Environment Simulator (SES) using the JWST telescope 
simulator (OSIM). 
 
 
Unlike the Hubble Space telescope, which resides in low earth 
orbit, the JWST cannot be serviced by astronauts due to its 
more distant Sun -Earth L2 point orbit. However, in contrast 
to prior space observatories, the JWST telescope and 
instrument optical systems employ a high degree of capability 
for in -flight adjustment (Barto 2008), and lessons learned 
from prior observatory test programs are c arefully taken into 
account in design of the above test program (Feinberg 2008). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
